2018 - Atual
Audit Analysis of Government Procurement: A Brazil City Case
Descrição: This project is a joint work with the mayor?s office of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and focuses on their medication procurement analysis. The ?Prefeitura de Rio de Janeiro (PRJ)? audit group has created a data analysis group. This project is joint with this group and will try to guide them in group development. The project will aim to identify the anomalies and the causes, and prevent similar losses in the future through continuous audit. This research will use the procurement data of PRJ to illustrate the functionality of audit analysis and its importance in government internal control.      There will be two stages for the project. The first stage is to rank the top 20 purchased medications by PRJ. To achieve this goal: we will import the PRJ procurements occurred in 2017 and 2018 into python and tableau. A dictionary of material codes will be used to extract only medication orders from original procurement data. A synonyms dictionary will be created to group medication of same nature but of different unit size together. Fuzzy matching will be used to create the synonyms dictionary. Data misclassifications will be identified and eliminated from the result of this step. The second stage is to compare PRJ medication acquisition price with national acquisition price of Brazil. After the comparison, possible saving opportunities will be revealed and suggestions on future monitoring of the procurement system and internal control will be provided. The suggestions can be applied to a variety of other categories of government procurement processes.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Mauricio Mello Codesso - Coordenador / VASARHELYI, MIKLOS A. - Integrante / WENRU WANG - Integrante.
2018 - Atual
Continuous Process Monitoring
Descrição: Continuous process monitoring is the evolution of process mining where it?s considered a novel approach for assurance that utilizes the advantages of a continuous monitoring layer using rule- based process mining techniques. The periodic nature of auditing and monitoring allows for a valuable time-delay between the occurrence of an important business events and the analysis of that event. By significantly reducing the time-delay, the created information becomes more valuable since it allows for additional management control and assurance activities. 
Continuous process monitoring is based on a novel approach for monitoring assurance that combines the advantages of continuous monitoring with those of process mining. Auditors can actively detect and investigate deviations and exceptions as they occur along the transaction process by continuously monitoring business process controls and testing transactions, rather than react after the exceptions have long occurred. Any transaction that violates a set of business rules would be intercepted or flagged by the system until investigated by an auditor. This continuous monitoring using rule-based process mining approach provides a high level of assurance about the operating effectiveness of controls throughout a business process.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Mauricio Mello Codesso - Integrante / VASARHELYI, MIKLOS A. - Coordenador / ABDULRAHMAN ALREFAI - Integrante.