2022 - Atual
FACEPE/APQ (Nº 0867- 6.02/22) An Infrastructure to Derive Requirements from Business Models
Descrição: Currently, the importance of business models is a fundamental concept for any organization. This happens because business model is an efficient tool to identify who is offering what to whom and is expects what in return. Not forgetting that they also must be expressed in the requirements models, as they are useful to understand how a business is organized, who interacts with whom, what objectives and strategies are being pursued; that is, what work the business performs and how it performs that work.
Thus, business models have received special attention from two communities, namely: business administration and computer science. Due to the increasingly important role of information systems in the performance of business models, a mutual understanding for better interaction between these communities is essential. However, due to the different perspectives, the interaction between these two communities is rarely perfect, resulting in difficulties when it comes to understanding these models and the requirements they represent. In that event, this project focuses on an approach to systematize the design and possible derivations of business models up to the requirements of information systems, surely going over process models.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (2) Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Denis Silva da Silveira - Coordenador / João Baptista da Silva Araújo Junior - Integrante / Rafael Batista Duarte - Integrante / Silvia Abrahão - Integrante / Emilio Insfran - Integrante / Tatiane da Costa Torres de Andrade - Integrante / Lenylda Maria de Souza Albuquerque - Integrante / Nicir Maria Gomes Chaves) - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundação de Amparo à Ciência e Tecnologia do Estado de Pernambuco - Auxílio
										financeiro / Universidade Federal de Pernambuco - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2019 - Atual
CNPq/Universal (Nº 433419/2018-0) Evaluation of Cognitive Effectiveness of Business Process Models
Descrição: This research project is a natural evolution of the research initiated previously through the FACEPE/APQ Nº 0648-6.02/15 and CNPq/MCTI Nº 444637/2015-0 calls for proposals, complementing the previous ones with the assessment of the cognitive effectiveness of business processes. This project proposes a method of empirical evaluation of business process language concrete syntax on the cognitive effectiveness involved on the understandability and on the ability to review these models by stakeholders that have little or no experience with the business process modeling language. To this end, we are proposing (and testing) a method for evaluating the cognitive effectiveness of business process modeling languages. The cognitive effectiveness is determined based on the ease, speed and accuracy to process the information illustrated on a requirements model. This method is based on empirical studies using the eye-tracking technology to investigate business process modeling languages.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2)  / Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: Denis Silva da Silveira - Coordenador / João Baptista da Silva Araújo Junior - Integrante / Charlie Silva Lopes - Integrante / Rafael Batista Duarte - Integrante / Vinicius de Albuquerque Brito - Integrante / Miguel Goulão - Integrante / Ana Raquel Ribeiro Henriques - Integrante.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 1 / Número de orientações: 2
2015 - 2018
CNPq/MCTI (Nº 444637/2015-0) Systematizing the Configurable Processes Modeling for Public Administration
Descrição: A configurable business process represents multiple alternatives of a business process model, using concepts from the Software Product Line Engineering area, incorporating the term process variability, which refers to a family of processes, and a mechanism of configuration, allowing in project time to obtain an individualized process. However, business process modeling languages are often weak in their ability to describe multiple scenarios and rarely support configurable process models. Although some languages have this support, the problem of recovering variants of individual processes through the configuration of a reference model is not yet largely solved. These problems have a great impact on the reuse process at the design stage and, in addition, a rigid process logic becomes a heavy burden for the maintenance of the information systems corresponding to the business processes during their execution. Specifically observing the notation of business process modeling, there is no systematic mechanism for the elaboration of configurable business process models, hindering the adaptability and reuse of processes. The aim of this project was to capture points of variability in a process model, proposing a systematic approach to model both variability and composition, for later reuse of business processes in organizations. To this end, process models of the Brazilian public administration were used as a case study to validate the research results.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (2) Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Denis Silva da Silveira - Coordenador / Eliane Maria Loiola - Integrante / João Baptista da Silva Araújo Junior - Integrante / Ana Maria Diniz Moreira - Integrante / Charlie Silva Lopes - Integrante / Rafael Batista Duarte - Integrante / Daiana Amorim Ferreira - Integrante / Maria Luiza Florêncio. de Queiroz Albuquerque - Integrante.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 4
2014 - 2017
FACEPE/APQ (Nº 0648-6.02/15) Modularization of Quality Business Processes
Descrição: Currently, business process managers are looking for ways to provide greater agility and improve the performance of their processes. However, the implementation of these initiatives in organizations is hampered due to the granularity of the processes, possibly generated through a functional decomposition. According to the principle of functional decomposition, modeling should map the functions of an organization in a hierarchical way, starting from macroscopic functions, decomposing them, down to the subfunctions. One way to obtain functional decomposition is the identification and separation of concerns. The principle of separation of concerns takes care of human limitations in dealing with complexity, allowing the designer to focus on one subject or characteristic at a time. That is, modularize a solution so that each process is focused on solving only a single problem. In this context, the division of processes into modules (subprocesses), which contemplate only one concern, can reduce complexity, enabling greater understanding and facilitating maintenance and flexibility for the reuse of processes. Thus, it is interesting to note that in the notation of business process modeling (BPMN) there is no systematic mechanism that makes it possible to separate and evaluate the modularization of business process models. Therefore, this project aims to promote the systematization and evaluation of modularization in BPMN models. Hence, it is expected with the execution of this research to obtain the following results: (1) the evolution in the BPMN 2.0 metamodel so that it is possible to conceptually model the transversal characteristics. (2) the proposal, with the aid of the Goal-Question-Metric (GQM) approach, of a set of metrics for assessing the completeness and complexity of business process models.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (3)  / Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Denis Silva da Silveira - Coordenador / Jairo Simião Dornelas - Integrante / Fernando Jose Araujo Wanderley - Integrante / Marinita Eliara Kommers - Integrante / Charlie Silva Lopes - Integrante / Rosamaria Belo Lucena - Integrante / Rafael Batista Duarte - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundação de Amparo à Ciência e Tecnologia do Estado de Pernambuco - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 4
2011 - 2013
A Creative Approach to Modeling Business Processes Through Creative Techniques
Descrição: A difficulty of process modeling is its multidisciplinary, which imposes on the requirements the need to establish a common vocabulary that transits both in the universe of specialists in the business area and in the technology area. However, in most associations what really occurs is a linguistic division between those involved. The main aim of this project was to devise an approach to reduce this linguistic division, using mental models (maps), to facilitate communication and simplify the modeling of an organization's common behavior and variables, making this process more agile and effective. In other words, unstructured and vague ideas, coming from specialists, through creative techniques (mind maps), easier to be taught and understood by the interested parties, to automatically transform into traditional requirements models, more specifically in process business models.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (2) Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Denis Silva da Silveira - Coordenador / Fernando Jose Araujo Wanderley - Integrante / Marinita Eliara Kommers - Integrante / Charlie Silva Lopes - Integrante / Rafael Batista Duarte - Integrante.
2010 - 2013
Digital Libraries: Defining a Framework to Make It Accessible
Descrição: Accessibility on the Web implies making content available in a flexible way for all different groups of users. Therefore, Web developers should not ignore the differences between the users of these systems and must apply methods and techniques that help them in the challenge of allowing access to information available on the Web for everyone. Today, interest in digital libraries has grown significantly, bringing with it the need for accessible tools that facilitate the publication and retrieval of digital information. Digital libraries are usually developed with the intention of meeting the needs of a specific community. However, few of these services are designed as systems that can be reused in different contexts. Thereupon, it is important to create accessible general-purpose tools that lower costs and facilitate the development of digital libraries. Thus, the objective of this project is to specify and instantiate a framework to build accessible digital libraries for specific purposes.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (1) . Integrantes: Denis Silva da Silveira - Coordenador / Darliane Goes de Miranda - Integrante.Financiador(es): Universidade Federal de Pernambuco - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2006 - 2009
AlgoDeGrafos: A Tool for Modeling Graphs
Descrição: This project carried out a study of algorithms in Graph Theory and aimed to develop a tool - called AlgoDeGrafo (in Portuguese), aimed at teaching Graph Theory, in undergraduate and graduate courses. The AlgoDeGrafo tool is freely available for academic purposes and can be used as a support in courses on graph theory algorithms.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Denis Silva da Silveira - Integrante / Valdir A. Melo - Integrante / Paulo Oswaldo Boaventua Netto - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Bolsa / Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Bolsa.Número de produções C, T & A: 11
2006 - 2007
Overview of Brazilian Web Accessibility
Descrição: This project aimed at conducting a study on accessibility on the Web, evaluating Brazilian public organizations. This study identified the difficulties encountered by organizations during the process of accessing their Websites. For this, three tests were conducted, through a system that traveled the Internet and assessed the degree of compliance of the Websites with the accessibility guidelines. Subsequently, an online questionnaire was prepared for organizations. The results obtained directly with the organizations, through the questionnaires, and the results of the tests indicated that there are still some efforts on the path of accessibility in Brazil. However, the low number of accessible sites was an indicator that much work is still needed to make web accessibility a reality in Brazil.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (1) . Integrantes: Denis Silva da Silveira - Integrante / Simone Bacellar Leal Ferreira - Coordenador / Rodrigo C. Santos - Integrante / Marcos G. Leal Ferreira - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 1
2005 - 2009
ANIMARE: An Animation Method for Validation the Business Process
Descrição: This project developed a method for validating business processes with respect to business rules. The method models the process as an UML activity diagram annotated with statements in Object Constraint Language (OCL) representing the business rules. This model is converted to an oriented graph, called control graph, which is decorated with the business rules. The model validation activity is performed by the animation of a set of scenarios, each one comprising the set of the objects required for the instance execution. Tracking each scenario animation along the control graph allows for the detection of situations that violate the correct process execution. The occurrence of these situations can be avoided by changing the process model or by introducing / altering the associated business rules.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: Denis Silva da Silveira - Coordenador / Eber Assis Schmitz - Integrante / Paulo Oswaldo Boaventua Netto - Integrante.Financiador(es): Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Bolsa.Número de produções C, T & A: 7
2002 - 2008
Business Modeling: Processes, Business Rules and Information Systems
Descrição: This project aimed at developing methodologies, techniques and tools to support business modeling. The methodologies, techniques and tools have been progressively incorporated into an integrated environment; whose main objective is to support the development of business information systems. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (3)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: Denis Silva da Silveira - Integrante / Eber Assis Schmitz - Coordenador / Priscila Machado V. Lima - Integrante / Felipe Dias - Integrante / Gisele P. Morgado - Integrante / Pedro Oscar Souza Cruz - Integrante / Antônio Juarez Alencar - Integrante / Fernando Manso - Integrante.Financiador(es): Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Auxílio
										financeiro / Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro.