2021 - Atual
IEA-EBC Annex 86: Energy Efficient Indoor Air Quality Management in Residential Buildings
Descrição: The goal of this proposed annex is to work in an international collaboration to create an integrated general assessment method to operationalize the air quality approach suggested by IEA EBC Annex 9 to support the development, rating and implementation of innovative and highly energy efficient IAQ management strategies. An IAQ management strategy is understood to be any coherent set of measures by a stakeholder in the building that aims to improve IAQ.
AIM
The annex proposal aims to improve the energy efficiency of the IAQ management strategies in operation and to improve their acceptability, control, installation quality and long-term reliability.
Key objectives
The Annex has the following specific key objectives:
To select metrics to assess energy performance and indoor environmental quality of an IAQ management strategy and study their aggregation
To improve the acceptability, control, installation quality and long-term reliability of IAQ management strategies by proposing specific metrics for these quality issues
To set up a coherent rating method for IAQ management strategy that takes into account the selected metrics
To identify or further develop the tools that will be needed to assist designers and managers of buildings in assessing the performance of an IAQ management strategy using the rating method
To gather existing or provide new standardized input data for the rating method
To study the potential use of smart materials as (an integral part of) an IAQ management strategy
To develop specific IAQ management solutions for retrofitting existing buildings
To benefit from recent advances in sensor technology and cloud-based data storage to systematically improve the quality of the implemented IAQ management strategies, ensure their operation and improve the quality of the rating method as well as the input data
To improve the availability of these data sources by exploring use cases for their providers
To disseminate about each of the above findings.
The whole project has 5 subtasks and we are focused on the fourth one, which focuses on practical conditions that assure reliable, cost effective and robust implementation of smart ventilation. This includes both installation and operation. A poor performance of smart ventilation systems can not only lead to waste of energy and aggravated IAQ. It can also create a bad reputation of smart ventilation among relevant stakeholders - designers, installers as well as occupants. This, in the end, can lead to adoption of more primitive, less efficient (in terms of energy use) and less effective (in terms of IAQ) forms of IAQ management. The subtask defines a smart ventilation according to the AIVC: ?Smart ventilation is a process to continually adjust the ventilation system in time, and optionally by location, to provide the desired IAQ benefits while minimizing energy consumption, utility bills and other non-IAQ costs (such as thermal discomfort or noise). (?)?. Starting from this definition, demand-controlled ventilation (DCV) is considered as a specific subset of smart ventilation. This definition of smart ventilation includes a wide range of systems currently available in the literature and on the market depending on the type of sensing parameters (CO2, humidity, occupancy, ?), the type of sensing combinations, the type of installation (centralized/decentralized) and the types of control algorithms. The subtask will also extend the scope to include alternative airflow distribution patterns and system configurations.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Nathan Mendes - Integrante / Denner Ribeiro Machado - Integrante / Jelle Laverge - Coordenador / Marc Abadie - Integrante / Gaelle Guyot - Integrante / Benjamin Jones - Integrante / Pawel Wargocki - Integrante / Gabriel Rojas - Integrante / Jakub Kolarik - Integrante / Marc Delghust - Integrante / Benjamin Hanoune - Integrante / Daniela Andressa Mortari - Integrante / Marcos Batistella Lopes - Integrante.
2018 - 2022
CAPES-COFECUB 898/18: Cooperation Franco-Brésilienne pour l'étude avancée de la performance énergétique des bâtiments  Partie 4: Modèles mathématiques et Méthodes numériques pour l'amélioration des outils de simulation des bâtiments
Descrição: Ce travail s?insère dans un contexte social et environnemental à forts enjeux, tels que la
réduction de la consommation énergétique des bâtiments dans le but de réduire les émissions
de gaz à effet de serre. Au Brésil, comme en France, les bâtiments sont responsables de plus de
40% de la consommation total d?énergie [1-2]. A l?échelle mondiale, les groupes de travail,
lancés par l?Agence Internationale de l?Énergie, ont pour objectif le développement de telles
solutions pour répondre à ces enjeux d?intérêts majeurs pour tous les pays. 
Au Brésil, l?étiquette d?efficacité énergétique pour les bâtiments a été instaurée en 2009.
Depuis, le Laboratoire des Systèmes Thermiques a adapté le logiciel Domus pour appuyer ce
processus à travers l?ensemble du pays. Néanmoins, ce dispositif d?étiquette ignore les
phénomènes physiques de transferts d?humidité, provoquant d?importantes incertitudes dans
l?estimation des consommations énergétiques et empêchant la prédiction de problèmes de
durabilité liés à l?humidité (moisissures, etc.).
En France, les nouveaux bâtiments étant très isolé thermiquement, le flux de chaleur sensible
est par conséquent très faible. Dans ces conditions, le flux de chaleur latent (provoqué par le
changement de phase du transfert d?eau) peut fortement impacter le comportement énergétique
des bâtiments ainsi que les problèmes de durabilité de la structure.
Cependant, comme il l?a été constaté pendant le projet CAPES-COFECUB 734/2013, les
modèles mathématiques actuels ne permettent pas de représenter de manière précise les
phénomènes physiques. Des divergences lors de comparaison des résultats numériques avec
des observations expérimentales des phénomènes, particulièrement quand les transferts
convectifs ou leur nature multidimensionnelle sont non négligeables.
Par conséquent, il est d?un intérêt commun, au Brésil comme en France, de collaborer afin
d?améliorer les modèles numériques de prédiction du comportement hygrothermique des
bâtiments. Ce projet s?appuiera sur une forte synergie entre les collaborateurs brésiliens de la
PUCPR et français de l?USMB. L?atteinte de cet objectif passera par le développement de
modèles mathématiques innovants basés sur différentes méthodes numériques pour améliorer
de manière significative la précision du calcul tout en réduisant le temps de simulation.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (1) Doutorado: (5) . Integrantes: Nathan Mendes - Coordenador / Luis Mauro Moura - Integrante / Paulo Philippi - Integrante / Monika Woloszyn - Integrante / Stephan Hennings Och - Integrante.Financiador(es): Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2015 - 2018
IEA-EBC Annex 68: Indoor Air Quality Design and Control in Low Energy Residential Buildings standards
Descrição: To achieve nearly net zero energy use, all buildings in future will need to be more efficient and optimized. As new buildings are already well insulated in certain industrialised countries, the focus is shifting to limiting space heating energy consumption by reducing ventilation demand. Low energy buildings need to be airtight and energy demand for ventilation is often reduced by lowering the ventilation rate to the minimum necessary. Each of these can have adverse impacts on indoor air quality (IAQ). This project is therefore investigating how to ensure that future low energy buildings are able both to improve their energy performance and to provide comfortable and healthy indoor environments.
Reducing the amount of fresh air supplied to a building would save energy, but however may increase the risk of poor indoor air quality. Therefore, it is very important to find the ideal balance between energy efficiency and the need for ventilation. The aim of this project is to use existing data and tools, which in combination give an integrated picture of the air flow, hygrothermal and air quality conditions in whole buildings with a focus on optimisation of their use and operation. This should achieve energy efficiency alongside providing healthy and comfortable indoor environments.
Project Objectives
The two main objectives for the project are:
To provide a scientific basis for the design and operational strategies of buildings that have minimal energy consumption, and at the same time maintain very high standards regarding indoor environmental quality based on the control of sources, sinks and flows of heat, air, moisture, and pollutants under in-use conditions.
To collect and provide data about properties for transport, retention and emission of chemical substances in new and recycled materials under the influence of heat and moisture transfer.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (1) Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Nathan Mendes - Integrante / John Grunewald - Integrante / Carsten Rode - Coordenador / Marc Abadie - Integrante.
2014 - Atual
Desenvolvimento de Modelos Matemáticos, Materiais, Técnicas, Estratégias e Instrumentos para Eficiência Energética e Conversão de Energia
Descrição: Dentre diversos objetivos deste projeto, deve-se destacar o desenvolvimento de modelos matemáticos, de códigos computacionais, de técnicas experimentais e de estratégias para o melhoramento de desempenho energético de edificações e sistemas térmicos. Abrange-se no termo sistemas térmicos, condicionadores de ar, refrigeradores, compressores, bombas de calor, coletores solares e diversos outros sistemas físicos dos diferentes setores da sociedade onde há interesse no estudo de processos termoenergéticos. Especificamente, pode-se destacar o desenvolvimento de modelos matemáticos e do software Domus que vem sendo desenvolvido desde a década de 90 para simulação energética de edificações, apoio à Regulamentação de Eficiência Energética em Edificações (RTQ-C e RTQ-R) e análise de transferência de calor, ar, umidade e espécies químicas em materiais porosos utilizados em edificações. Diversas atividades - tais como desenvolvimento de modelos matemáticos, validação do software Domus, desenvolvimento de uma biblioteca dinâmica (DLL RTQ-C) para etiquetagem automatizada de edificações comerciais, públicas e de serviços, aprimoramento de interface gráfica, desenvolvimento de filmes e de conteúdos didáticos, inovação com o lançamento nacional do Domus-Eletrobras, desenvolvimento da plataforma (www.domus.pucpr.br), participação e organização de Encontros do Anexos 41, 55 e 60 da IEA (International Energy Agency) e organização de Escolas Doutorais Internacionais em temas do projeto -, facilitam a disseminação e prospecção tanto m nível nacional como internacional.
Este grande projeto possui uma frente (HAM ? Heat, Air and Moisture) em que se dá continuidade ao desenvolvimento de modelos matemáticos para transporte combinado de calor, ar, umidade e sais e para estimativa de coeficientes de transporte (Financiamentos: CNPq - PQ 306269/2009-0, CNPq 480497/2011-7, Eletrobras ECV 283a/11, Eletrobras ECV 283/08, CNPq?480061/2008-4, CNPq - PQ 306820/2006-4, CNPq - PQ 300263/2003-1, CNPq ? CT-ENERG 401090/2003-5, CNPq/APV 451676/2004-1, CNPq - PQ 300.154/00-3 e Fundação Araucária Ref. 295). Essa frente possui uma integração direta com uma segunda frente (Equipment), onde são desenvolvidos modelos matemáticos para sistemas de climatização e outros equipamentos, além de estudar estratégias para aprimoramento de conforto. A frente de trabalho Equipment iniciou-se em 1998 e tem contado com os seguintes financiamentos: Electrolux 1999, Eletrobras ECV 283a/11, Eletrobras ECV 283/08, FINEP Ref. 2460/05, Eletrobrás ECV 934/2003, CNPq/Energia 551461/2001-2, CNPq/Energia 550093/01-0, CNPq ? CT-ENERG 401090/2003-5. O projeto vincula-se a projetos internacionais tais como IEA Annex 60, IEA Annex 55, IEA Annex 41, CAPES COFECUB 774/13.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (3)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (5)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (8) . Integrantes: Nathan Mendes - Coordenador / Luis Mauro Moura - Integrante / Gerson Henrique dos Santos - Integrante / Ricardo C L F  Oliveira - Integrante / Carsten Rode - Integrante / Walter Mazuroski - Integrante / Etienne Wurtz - Integrante / Michael Wetter - Integrante / Luciano Ayres Mello - Integrante / Lorena Freitas Dutra - Integrante / Monika Woloszin - Integrante.
2013 - 2017
IEA ECBCS Annex 60: New generation computational tools for building and community energy systems based on the Modelica and Functional Mockup Interface standards
Descrição: As buildings become increasingly integrated to reduce energy and peak power and to increase occupant health and productivity, new challenges are posed to engineers when using building energy simulation (BES) programs to support decision making during product development, building design, commissioning and operation. New requirements that were not yet recognized 20 to 40 years ago when the development of current building simulation programs started include:
Model-based design of integrated building systems by design firms and of products by equipment and controls providers to optimize energy-efficiency and peak load, and to reduce time-to-market for components, systems and advanced control systems.
Design processes based on a Building Information Model (BIM) which become increasingly used by design firms.
Integrated design of building envelope, HVAC systems and control strategies by design firms.
Model use to support operation, for control providers as part of an energy or smart-grid aware controller, for commissioning agents to provide a reference for the expected building operation, for fault detection and diagnostics providers to provide a reference model that can be used to classify fault signatures, and for urban planners and utility companies to develop design and operation strategies for energy grids with dispatchable distributed loads, generation and storage.
These applications require the integration of multiple domains (air-flow, thermodynamics, controls, indoor environmental quality, and electrical grid) and multiple disciplines (HVAC/energy consultant, architect, controls engineer, electrical engineer) that use a variety of tools that represent building systems across largely varying time scales from seconds to years and length scales from building components to urban districts. Next to the mentioned engineering consultancy services, the technology is as well important to the building simulation research community to build and deploy their R&D through standardized tools.
Modeling and simulation technologies that will be leveraged in this Annex are based on the object-oriented modeling language Modelica. The Modelica Standard Library contains more than 1300 models and functions that are open-source, freely available and well documented. However, the Modelica Standard Library does not have models for building energy systems, nor was the development of such models part of three European projects which were conducted with 54 million Euros investments in the automotive, aerospace and chemical industry. Moreover, current Modelica developments in the building sector are not coordinated. Consequently, model libraries lack common interfaces and typically cannot be linked with each other.
The need to couple legacy code to Modelica is clearly recognized. The Functional Mockup Interface standardizes the application programming interface for inclusion of  models into other simulation programs. It also standardizes how different  programs can communicate with each other during run-time. Modelica and the Functional Mockup Interface (FMI) standard have been selected as they are industrial-strength, non-proprietary, industry-driven standards that allow technology transfer between the building performance simulation community and much larger dynamic modeling communities from controls, automotive, power-plant, electrical system and chemical plant modeling.
Rather than reinventing the wheel, a major focus of this Annex will be how these investments, that are orders of magnitudes larger than what is invested in any single BES program, can be leveraged and extended where needed in a way that coordinates the activities of several countries. The Annex project therefore does not focus on the development of a single tool. At the same time, with the FMI technology, existing BES tools can be integrated.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (3) . Integrantes: Nathan Mendes - Integrante / Michael Wetter - Coordenador.
2010 - 2014
IEA ANNEX 55: Reliability of Energy Efficient Building Retrofitting - Probability Assessment of Performance and Cost (RAP-RETRO)
Descrição: The scope of the annex (IEA ANNEX 55) is to develop and to provide decision support data and tools for energy retrofitting measures. The tools will be based on probabilistic methodologies for prediction of energy use, life cycle cost and functional performances. The impact of uncertainty on the performance and costs will be considered in this project. Methods based on probability give powerful tools that can provide us with reliable ranges for the outcome.
The ultimate outcome of the annex is to develop knowledge and tools that support the use of probability based design strategies in retrofitting of buildings to ensure that the anticipated energy benefits can be realized. These will give reliable information about the true outcome of retrofitting measures regarding energy consumption, cost and functional performances.
The principle objective will hence be realized by merging hygrothermal building physics with probability and economical analysis. The developed methods will then be applied to optimize energy retrofitting methods.
The main objectives of the annex are to:
? Develop a common framework for probabilistic assessment of energy retrofitting measures
? Develop and validate probabilistic tools for energy use, life cycle cost and hygrothermal performances
? Collect and analyze data in order to create stochastic data sets
? Apply and demonstrate probabilistic methodology on (at least) five real life case studies, with a focus on residential buildings
Candidates for the case studies are found among ongoing retrofitting projects that include: Interior and exterior wall insulation system, cavity wall insulation, window upgrading, HVAC-system changes, change of heating system and/or operation of buildings, installation solar panel on roofs, insulation of cold attics and crawl-space foundation.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (2) Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Nathan Mendes - Coordenador.
2003 - 2008
Whole Building Heat, Air and Moisture Response (MOIST-ENG)
Descrição: SUB-PROJETO do Proj. HAM
A better knowledge of the whole building heat, air and moisture balance and its effects on indoor environment, on energy consumption for heating, cooling, air humidification and air drying and on the envelope's durability is needed. This was already clear at the time of the annexes 14, 24 and 32. The whole building heat, air and moisture balance has a direct impact on the microclimate that promotes mold growth, as was studied in annex 14. In annex 24, the indoor environment was handled as an input parameter, although measurements showed numerous effects of adventitious air flows and humidity storage on the indoor humidity conditions. Annex 32 repeatedly underlined the linkages between envelope and whole building HAM-performance.
This annex has two main objectives:
First, a detailed exploration of the complex physics involved in whole building heat, air and moisture response (HAM-response). That objective includes basic research, a further development of existing and new models, measurement of the moisture storage function of materials, measurement of the air permeance of envelope parts as build, mock up testing, field testing and validation by inter-comparison of models through common exercises and confrontation with measured data.
That first objective should foster a basic understanding of transient moisture storage in different finishing materials and moisture exchange with the indoor air. For that purpose material storage properties will be measured. It should help develop numerical models and back experiments that link the heat and moisture storage and HAM-transfer in enclosures to the performance of the building and the HVAC system. Mock up and field measurements must prove the effectiveness of moisture storage under different weather conditions (cold, warm and dry, warm and humid and maritime).
Second, an analysis of the effects of the whole building HAM-response on comfort, enclosure durability and energy consumption.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (0)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (3)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Nathan Mendes - Integrante / Kátia C Mendonça - Integrante / Hugo Hens - Coordenador / Carsten Rode - Integrante / Andreas Holm - Integrante / Hans Simmler - Integrante / Dominique Derome - Integrante / Daniel Quenard - Integrante / Carl-Eric Hagentoft - Integrante / Chris Sanders - Integrante / Hans Janssen - Integrante / Jesper Arfvidsson - Integrante / Kaisa Svennberg - Integrante / Kumar Kumaran - Integrante / Arild Gustavsen - Integrante / Achilles Kariagiosis - Integrante / Peter Matiasovsky - Integrante / Anker Nielsen - Integrante / Rachel Becker - Integrante / Heiko Fechner - Integrante / Jos Van Schijndel - Integrante / Marc O Abadie - Integrante.Financiador(es): International Energy Agency - Cooperação.Número de produções C, T & A: 4
1999 - 2007
Estudo de Redução de Consumo de Energia em Sistemas de refrigeração
Descrição: Segundo levantamentos do setor energético nacional, os refrigeradores domésticos são responsáveis por cerca de 33% da energia consumida pelo setor residencial, ou seja, cerca de 7% do total consumido no País. Assim, o Laboratório de Sistemas Térmicos da PUCPR vem estudando desde 1998 alternativas para aumentar a eficiência termodinâmica de sistemas térmicos, em especial, refrigeradores e "freezers" de uso doméstico e, reduzir o consumo de energia do setor residencial brasileiro. Dessa forma, propôs-se um trabalho em cooperação com a Electrolux do Brasil para avaliar a influência de itens dos sistemas de refrigeração residencial sobre o consumo de energia elétrica, em especial evaporadores. Dentre as principais propostas deste trabalho, devem ser destacados o desenvolvimento de um dispositivo calorimétrico para avaliação de desempenho de evaporadores, desenvolvimento de componentes, ensaios de produtos conforme normas ISO e ABNT, desenvolvimento de modelos matemáticos, desenvolvimento da versão 2.0 do software de simulação FRIGUS, aperfeiçoamento do sistema integrado de aquisição de sinais (SIAS) para automatização de relatórios de ensaio de consumo de energia e de monitoramento remoto, análise de sensibilidade experimental e numérica de diversos itens quanto ao consumo de energia segundo a norma ISO 7371 e desenvolvimento de correlações matemáticas visando redução de consumo de energia em sistemas domésticos de refrigeração. 
Projetos de apoio: 
i)	Estudo de Redução de Consumo de Energia em Sistemas Domésticos de Refrigeração" (CNPq/RHAE - Ref. 610.041/98-3)
ii)	Estudo de Redução de Consumo de Energia em Sistemas Domésticos de Refrigeração (Electrolux do Brasil) 
iii)	Redução de Consumo de Energia em Refrigeradores: Análise Numérico-Experimental de Evaporadores (CNPq/Energia - Ref. 550093-01). Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (5)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Nathan Mendes - Coordenador / Luis Mauro Moura - Integrante / Kátia Cordeiro dos Santos - Integrante.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Bolsa / Electrolux do Brasil - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 31
1998 - 2013
Eficiência Termoenergética em Sistemas de Climatização (HVAC)
Descrição: Não é uma hipérbole quando sugere-se que um projeto melhor de edificação voltado à conservação de energia resultaria em 50-75% de redução de seu consumo, e que intervenções nas edificações existentes atingiriam rapidamente uma redução de 30%. Em resposta a esse interesse é que desenvolve-se este projeto de cunho aplicado e voltado ao estudo de alterações em termos de questões relevantes desde saúde e conforto até práticas de sustentabilidade, passando-se pela importante redução de consumo e demanda de energia em edificações. Desse modo, buscando atender às necessidades prementes do cenário brasileiro e mundial, promove-se o estudo de estratégias que permitem a obtenção de conforto e redução de consumo e demanda de energia através de estudos numéricos e experimentais. 
Projetos de apoio: 
i)	"Contribuição Brasileira ao Projeto Multinacional da IEA em Simulação de Desempenho Energético e Higrotérmico de Edificações (Moist-Eng)" 2004-2006 -  CNPq - CT-Energ (401090/2003-5);
ii)	IEA (International Energy Agency) Annex 41: Whole-Building Heat, Air And Moisture Response (Moist-Eng)" 2003-2008 - Coord. Prof. Hugo Hens - Leuven - Bélgica; 
iii)	Expansão do Aparato Experimental do LST/ PUCPR para Realização de Testes e Melhoramento de Eficiência Energética em Sistemas de Climatização" 2004-2006 - ELETROBRÁS (ECV-934/2003) 
iv)	Avaliação Numérica de Coeficientes de Transferência de Calor e de Massa por Convecção em Paredes de Edificações, 2004, (CNPq/EM/APV 451676/2004-1).
v)	Desenvolvimento de Amb. Computacional para Análise e Controle de Sistemas Térmicos Integrados a Edificações (CNPq - 551461/2001-2).
vi) Aperfeiçoamento de Sistemas de Climatização para Redução de Consumo de Energia e Melhoria de Conforto Térmico (FINEP Ref. 2460/05).. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (4)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (3)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Nathan Mendes - Coordenador / Gustavo H C Oliveira - Integrante / Luís Mauro Moura - Integrante / Kátia Cordeiro Mendonça - Integrante.Financiador(es): Centrais Elétricas Brasileiras - Auxílio
										financeiro / Centrais Elétricas Brasileiras - Bolsa / Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Bolsa / Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos - Bolsa / Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos - Auxílio
										financeiro / International Energy Agency - Cooperação / Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 82
1998 - 2013
Desenvolvimento de Modelos e Algoritmos para Previsão da Transf. de Calor e Umidade em Mat. Poroso e Ambientes (HAM)
Descrição: Este projeto trata do desenvolvimento de modelos matemáticos e algoritmos para determinação da transferência de calor, ar, umidade e espécies químicas em materiais porosos consolidados e em solos insaturados, cujos coeficientes de transporte são altamente não-lineares. Adicionalmente, faz-se necessário complementar a pesquisa com o desenvolvimento de trabalhos de pesquisa para avaliação da distribuição de campos de temperatura, umidade e pressão em ambientes, bem como para o desenvolvimento de formulação matemática e bibliotecas computacionais para simular sistemas de climatização de ambientes. Este projeto está enquadrado na Tarefa 1 (Subtask 1: Modeling principles and common exercises)do Anexo 41 (Whole Building Heat, Air and Moisture Response- MOIST-ENG) da IEA (International Energy Agency) que iniciou-se no segundo semestre de 2003 e deverá ser finalizado no primeiro semestre de 2008. Detalhes do Anexo 41 da IEA podem ser encontrados em http://www.kuleuven.ac.be/bwf/projects/annex41/.
Projetos de apoio: 
i)	"Contribuição Brasileira ao Projeto Multinacional da International Energy Agency (IEA) em Simulação de Desempenho Energético e Higrotérmico de Edificações (Moist-Eng)" 2004-2006 -  CNPq - CT-Energ (401090/2003-5);
ii)	IEA (International Energy Agency) Annex 41: Whole-Building Heat, Air And Moisture Response (Moist-Eng)" 2003-2008 - Coord. Prof. Hugo Hens - Leuven - Bélgica; 
iii)	Simulação Termoenergética de Edificações Acoplada a Simulação Higrotérmica Tridimensional de Solos IEA (Processo: 300263/2003-1 (NV), Comitê Assessor: EM, Modalidade: PQ);
iv)	Collaborative Research between Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft zur Förderung der angewandten Forschung (Fraunhofer-Institut für Bauphysik - IBP) and PUCPR:  Exchange of results from hygrothermal research and common bench-marking of hygrothermal simulation tools;
v)	Contribution to the NORDTEST Project on Moisture Buffer Capacity of Porous Building Materials. Technical University of Denmark, 2003-2006.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (18)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (5)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Nathan Mendes - Coordenador / Kátia Cordeiro Mendonça - Integrante / Marc Olivier Abadie - Integrante.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro / Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Bolsa / International Energy Agency - Cooperação / Órgao de Normalização e Certificação Para Paises Nórdicos - Cooperação / Institut Für Bauphysik - Outra.Número de produções C, T & A: 91