2010 - Atual
OpenWordNet-PT
Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Valeria Correa Vaz de Paiva - Coordenador / Alexandre Rademaker - Integrante / Maria Claudia Freitas - Integrante / Livy Real Coelho - Integrante.
2006 - 2007
ASKER Ambiguity-Enabled, Scalableable Knowledge Repository
Descrição: This research is directed towards the difficult challenges of performing language-based inferences for answering questions based on large collections of open-text documents. We focus on language-based inference since focusing on the information content in the language helps to avoid human bias, and more general common-sense knowledge may not be appropriate in certain question-answering situations
Asker parses large volumes of text and produce Abstract Knowledge Representations (AKRs) which permit many textual en-tailments and contradictions to be identified. The AKRs are placed in a repository and indexed to allow efficient retrieval against the AKRs of natural language queries. Retrieved representations are checked against the query AKR to determine textual entailments or contradictions between the question and possible answers, using a formally verifiable entailment calculus. Results of entailment and contradiction detection are used to classify and rank answers.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Valeria Correa Vaz de Paiva - Coordenador.
2005 - 2008
Hybrid Logic Meets Other Logics (HyLoMOL)
Descrição: The HyLoMOL project is initiated by Thomas Bolander (DTU, Denmark), Torben Braüner (RUC, Denmark), and Jørgen Villadsen (DTU, Denmark). Given that hybrid logic has developed into a separate research area playing a significant role in a number of workshops and conferences on modal logic and also having its own series of workshops, the initiators of HyLoMOL find that it is time to devote more attention to possible interaction between hybrid logic and other logical fields. A number of logical fields are under consideration, in particular constructive/intuitionistic logic and paraconsistent logic as well as first-order and higher-order logic. HyLoMOL collaborates with Patrick Blackburn (INRIA, France) and Valeria de Paiva (PARC, USA).. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Valeria Correa Vaz de Paiva - Integrante / Torben Brauner - Coordenador / Thomas Bolander - Integrante / Joergen Villadsen - Integrante / Patrick Blackburn - Integrante.
2005 - 2006
Interoperable Knowledge Representation for Intelligence Support (IKRIS)
Descrição: Knowledge representation and reasoning (KR&R) technologies have been developed under a variety DTO programs (including NIMD-Novel Intelligence from Massive Data) to provide advanced support services for intelligence analysts and decision makers. The development of new technology necessarily involves exploration of alternative approaches, and it is highly unlikely that any single KR&R technology will be developed that will be optimal for all purposes. However, systems that use differing (and potentially incompatible) KR&R technologies need to be able to interoperate in order to achieve DTO goals of providing effective broad-based information technology to support the intelligence community, and that interoperation will necessarily involve systems being able to interchange and use knowledge represented in other systems. Thus, there is a need to develop methods for achieving interoperability among systems that use multiple KR&R technologies rather than to dictate the use of a single KR&R technology.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Valeria Correa Vaz de Paiva - Coordenador.
2004 - 2006
Two-way Bridge Between Language and Logic
Descrição: This project is part of ARDA's Advanced Question and Answering for Intelligence (Aquaint) program which seeks innovative, creative, high-risk, high-payoff research to achieve significant advancements in technologies and methods for advanced question answering against large heterogeneous collections of structured and unstructured information. We built a crosscutting linguistic technology that provides a two-way bridge that links these effective but quite different approaches. This enables a user to ask questions in natural language and have broad coverage from a large text database while also leveraging the deep capabilities of a first-class multi-source reasoning engine.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Valeria Correa Vaz de Paiva - Coordenador.
1998 - 2000
Formal Verification using Subtructural Logics
Descrição: Together with Saraswati Kalvala and Eike Ritter and Milly Maietti I am thinking about substructural logics for formal verification. This builds on our previous collaboration on mechanising Linear Logic in Isabelle, but the project is "on the back burner" for the time being.. Situação: Desativado; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Valeria Correa Vaz de Paiva - Integrante / Saraswati Kalvala - Coordenador.
1997 - 2000
xSLAM: an abstract machine for Linear Functional Programming
Descrição: Together with Eike Ritter, Neil Ghani (now at Nottingham), Milly Maietti, Francisco Alberti and Paola Maneggia I helped develop xLIN, a linear abstract machine, based on a calculus of explicit substitutions. You can read about this EPSRC project in the xSLAM page. This project finished in March 2000.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Valeria Correa Vaz de Paiva - Integrante / Eike Ritter - Coordenador / Neil Ghani - Integrante / Milly Maietti - Integrante / Paola Maneggia - Integrante / Francisco Alberti - Integrante.
1993 - Atual
Full Intuitionistic Linear Logic
Descrição: I started working on building up the foundations of Full Intuitionistic Linear Logic, in principle funded by the Nuffield Foundation. Due to my relocation to the US, the official project was cancelled and the abstract project has been in the "back burner" for a while.. Situação: Desativado; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Valeria Correa Vaz de Paiva - Coordenador.
1990 - Atual
Intuitionistic Modal Logics
Descrição: Informal research project with several collaborators, including Torben Brauner, Gianluigi Bellin, Eike Ritter, Michael Mendler, Rajeev Gore, Natasha Alechina, Frank Pfenning, Neil Ghani and Milly Maietti. Some of my reasons for being interested in intuitionistic modal logics are described in the preface of the special issue of the Journal of Logic and Computation that I guest edited with Rajeev Gore' and Michael Mendler.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Valeria Correa Vaz de Paiva - Coordenador.
1987 - Atual
Dialectica Categories
Descrição: Estou investigando o uso de versoes fibracionais das categorias dialecticas para modelagem de `containers' em programacao funcional, bem como o seu uso na unificacao de interpretacoes funcionais.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Valeria Correa Vaz de Paiva - Coordenador.