2022 - Atual
Causal Inference with expert augmented knowledge base for evidence generation in medicine with big data
Descrição: The proposal aims to develop a hybrid human-in-the-loop (HTL) methodological framework to identify the data generating mechanism in a graphical model that can be used for the identification of causal effects with SCMs. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador / Mohammad Adibuzzaman - Integrante.
2021 - Atual
Preserving Kidney Function in Children with Chronic Kidney Disease? The PRESERVE Study
Descrição: The purpose of this project is to evaluate the benefits and risks of alternative strategies of reninangiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) blockade in children with chronic kidney disease. Data will come from institutional electronic health records, which will be linked to data from the CKiD cohort study and kidney outcome data from the United States Renal Data System.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador / Forrest Christopher - Integrante / Michelle Denburg - Integrante.
2021 - Atual
Comparative effectiveness of palliative surgery versus additional anti-seizure medications for Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome
Descrição: This project will study the comparative effectiveness of different treatment approaches for Lennox-
Gastaut Syndrome. The IUSM data mart team will execute a SQL query written (and previously tested)
by Lurie Children?s Hospital, to collect de-identified individual-level data for patients in the IUSM
common data model data mart who have Lennox-Gastaut syndrome or other rare forms of epilepsy.
Role: Site PI. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador / Anne Berg - Integrante / Sandi Lam - Integrante.
2021 - Atual
Computable social factor phenotyping using EHR and HIE data
Descrição: Computable social factor phenotyping using EHR and HIE data
The long-term goal of this project is to develop technologies to support the efficient and effective delivery of services that address patients? nonclinical, economic, contextual, and psychosocial needs. This proposal will establish the validity and usefulness of patient-level computable social factor phenotypes for use in risk prediction and stratification models. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador.
2021 - Atual
The ultimate goal of this proposal is to enhance drug safety and efficacy in maternal and pediatric patients by understanding inter- and intra-individual sources of variability
Descrição: The Maternal and Pediatric Precision in Therapeutics (MPRINT) Hub will serve as a national resource for multidisciplinary expertise and knowledge in maternal and pediatric therapeutics.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador.
2020 - Atual
Leveraging Electronic Health Data to Assess the Burden of Diabetes Among Young Adults
Descrição: Diabetes mellitus is one of the most common chronic diseases in the United States, with over 30 million people (roughly 10% of the population) having the disease in 2017. Furthermore, while the prevalence and incidence of diabetes is highest among older adults, diabetes is one of the most common chronic diseases in young adulthood. Among young adults aged 18-44 years, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that 8.79% of this population had diabetes in 2018. We propose leveraging an electronic health data network, representative of its underlying population, to better estimate incidence and prevalence of diabetes in the Indiana adult population. The data will be made available to local and state public health authorities in addition to the DiCAYA Coordinating Center and CDC. The long-term objective of this project is to enhance access to information that can stimulate improving the surveillance, prevention, and management of diabetes across Indiana and the nation. We further seek to provide leadership, ideas, experience, and knowledge to the DiCAYA cooperative to achieve this objective.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador / Brion E Dixon - Integrante.
2019 - Atual
Children's Respiratory and Environmental Workgroup
Descrição: This consortium proposes to identify asthma endotypes and overcome shortcomings of individual cohorts by: 1) providing a large (nearly 9000 births and long-term follow-up of 6000-7000 children and young adults) and diverse national data set, 2) harmonizing data related to asthma clinical indicators and early life environmental exposures, 3) developing standardized measures for prospective data collection across CREW cohorts and other ECHO studies, and 4) conducting targeted enrollment of additional subjects into existing cohorts. This approach will enable collection of samples that are optimized for a systems approach to understanding how environmental and host factors in early life promote the development of specific asthma endotypes. Collectively, the results of this comprehensive research to identify the root causes of asthma vs. resilience and health will go far beyond what can be accomplished by individual cohorts, and thus provide a foundation for future efforts aimed at personalized prevention of chronic childhood asthma.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / GERN, JAMES E - Coordenador.
2018 - Atual
Leveraging Infrastructure to train investigators in patient centered outcomes research in the learning health system (LITI-PCORLHS)
Descrição: The purpose of the LHS-K12 program is to equip Scholars with the unique skill set required to conduct research within the learning health system by capitalizing on already available educational opportunities within our organization, while also creating new opportunities in educational domains where gaps exist.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador / Peter J Embi - Integrante / Aaron E Carroll - Integrante.
2017 - 2019
Fluoroquinolone restriction for the prevention of C. Difficile Infection
Descrição: This study evaluates the effectiveness of a new intervention, fluoroquinolone (FQ) Preprescription Authorization (PPA) strategy, to reduce and prevent Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) in hospital intensive care units (ICUs). The investigators will model a successful FQ PPA strategy in several Wisconsin ICUs and compare whether the intervention has improved outcomes in reducing CDIs. An additional goal of the study is to evaluate environmental and work system factors using systems engineering models in order to determine the most successful way to implement these new strategies.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Nasia Safdar - Coordenador.
2017 - 2017
All of us
Descrição: National Institute of Health - All of Us Research Program. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Murray Brilliant - Coordenador.
2017 - Atual
Mining, Indexing and Visualizing Big Data in Clinical Decision Support Systems ? MIVisBD*
Descrição: Today, almost all human activities generate and/or demand to store and process massive, diverse and complex data, either in scientific, academic, enterprise and even leisure pursuits ? a scenario that has being called the ?big data era?. Health-related and human activities are in the core of those activities, as they both produce big data and can take advantage of the technological storm, improving the behavior of everyone whose decision is increasingly guided by the information extracted from all these big data. In a clinical environment, for example, the Electronic Health Records (EHR) is the anchor to develop information extraction strategies. In this proposal, we aim at integrating novel, scalable database support, image processing, graph-based analysis, and visual analytics methods to leverage large amounts of EHR and repositories of clinical data to gather valuable and significant information for decision-making. The size and complexity large-scale databases offer great challenges when they need to be processed in terms both of applying analysis techniques and to support the development of subsequent applications for practical tools. However, it also embodies a cornucopia of opportunities to create algorithms and methods able to display smart and relevant information related to either a particular city or institution, coping strategic government decisions with the demands and benefits of big data. In this project we will develop methods and algorithms that will ultimately be materialized in a modular platform to be made available to the area community.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Agma Jaci Machado Traina - Coordenador.
2016 - 2018
Virtualized Homes: Tools for Better Discharge Planning.
Descrição: Purpose:
The goal of this project is to evaluate the technical feasibility and potential clinical value of integrating a
full-scale 3D model of a home into the clinical workflow.
Scope:
Better understanding of a patient?s residence can enhance tailoring of home-based self-care and disease
management interventions. Nowhere is this more important than in the discharge planning process. We
propose a proof-of-concept technical innovation that will enable clinicians and patients to easily
visualize the interior of the patient?s home, make plans that compensate for or take advantage of
features of the house and allow storage of annotated images of the home in the patient?s electronic
health record (EHR).. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador / Kevin Ponto - Integrante / Markus Broeker - Integrante / Patricia F. Brennan - Integrante.
2015 - 2019
Enhancing Anitbody-directed Innate Immunity to Improve Cancer Outcome
Descrição: Despite dramatic progress, too many patients still die of cancer. Survivors often suffer from the short and long-term effects of cytotoxic/genotoxic treatments. My vision is that future cancer treatments will combine approaches that destroy cancers by intelligent focusing of the patient's own immune system, with less dependence on toxic modalities. Immunotherapy (ImmRx) is being increasingly integrated into cancer treatment, with many examples of benefit. As clinically evident cancer has escaped from a patient's immune system, effective treatment should provide the immune system with the ability to recognize a tumor it previously ignored. This can be achieved by the use of monoclonal antibody (mAb)-based agents that recognize structures selectively expressed on tumors cells. My team has made substantial contributions to basic, translational and clinical cancer ImmRx. We demonstrated that anti-tumor mAbs use endogenous innate immune cells (mainly NK cells) to initiate tumor selective antibody dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) in vitro and tumor destruction in vivo. Simultaneous activation of cells responsible for ADCC synergizes with antitumor mAb-therapy. In the clinical trials we led, combinations of tumor-reactive mAbs and innate-immune activators were clinically active and are now the "standard of care" for pediatric neuroblastoma (NBL). Our analyses of patients' samples revealed how immune networks are activated, and how they may influence treatment efficacy. For example, we showed how these combination treatments can promote ADCC. Recently, using serum samples from a NBL trial, we identified an antibody in some patients, prior to any mAb treatment, directed against the therapeutic mAb. This endogenous antibody was associated with better clinical outcome. We are pursuing this finding, as it may provide ways to positively impact mAb therapy. In our mouse models, initial tumor destruction via innate immune ADCC induced a subsequent adaptive T cell response; addition of checkpoint blockade further augmented the adaptive response resulting in eradication of advanced murine tumors. Additional mouse studies led to the hypothesis that tumors escape ADCC by turning off NK cells through inhibitory NK receptors. This hypothesis was tested in patients receiving mAb (to induce ADCC). We found that patients with "favorable" NK receptor/ligand genotypes have better outcomes. The combinatory approach we are now pursuing involves mAb-directed activation of innate (NK and macrophages) immunity, induction of adaptive immunity, use of "next generation" mAb-based agents, and incorporation of genetic analyses of responsible NK receptors and their ligands. This strategy builds on the findings, momentum, and strengths of my team and our collaborations. We will systematically test, integrate and develop these concepts. Our goal is to develop life saving regimens that combine "off the shelf" agents and genetic evaluation to decrease the morbidity and mortality of cancer worldwide.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Paul Sondel - Coordenador.
2015 - 2018
PCORnet CLINICAL DATA RESEARCH NETWORK (CDRN) PHASE II
Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / A Brazier - Coordenador.
2015 - 2017
Surveillance of hospital acquired infectious using natural language processing
Descrição: Institute for Clinical and Translational Research.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador.
2015 - 2016
Predictors of lifestyle modification in hypertension: a computational analysis
Descrição: 2014 Fall Research Competition Award. Office of the Vice Chancellor for Research and Graduate Education,. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador.
2012 - 2017
Institutional Clinical and Translational Award (UW Madison)
Descrição: The CTSA Program is designed to develop innovative solutions that will improve the efficiency, quality and impact of the process for turning observations in the laboratory, clinic and community into interventions that improve the health of individuals and the public.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Marc Drezner - Coordenador.
2012 - 2014
Glucocorticoid-Induced Fractures in Children (GIFIC) Study
Descrição: Institute for Clinical and Translational Research. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador.
2012 - 2014
The Role of KIR and FcR Genotype in the Efficacy of mAb and IL2 Immunotherapy
Descrição: Killer Immunoglobulin-like Receptors (KIR) recognize specific KIR ligands (KIR-L) encoded by HLA alleles, and regulate activation and function of human natural killer (NK) cells. The interactions between KIR receptors on donor NK cells and KIR ligands on recipient tissues can influence anti-tumor efficacy of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). In autologous HSCT, an autologous KIR/KIR-L ""mismatch"" relationship between an individual's inherited arrays of KIR alleles and KIR-ligands can augment anti-tumor effects. We thus hypothesized that favorable KIR/KIR-L genotypic relationships (i.e.: KIR/KIR-L mismatch) could augment the efficacy of NK mediated immunotherapy. We found, in a small Phase II immunotherapy trial for neuroblastoma, that patients were more likely to benefit from NK-targeted immunotherapy if they were KIR/KIR-L mismatched. To extend and confirm this result our team is proposing confirmatory KIR/KIR-L analyses in 3 separate large (multi-institution cooperative group) clinical trials, each using a different form of immunotherapy known to activate or involve NK cells. For each of these trials we will determine whether KIR/KIR-L status is associated with clinical response. These analyses will explore 3 separate algorithms for characterizing KIR/KIR-L relationships, and use several distinct measures of clinical effect/response to evaluate possible associations. In addition, other studies have shown that the presence of high affinity Fc Receptor (FcR) alleles is associated with clinical benefit in the use of tumor-reactive monoclonal antibody (mAb), likely via antibody dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). We will obtain genotype data for patients from these 3 trials for their FcR alleles, as we hypothesize that the efficacy of mAb treatment may be influenced by the potential interaction of both FcR and KIR/KIR-L genotype. Finally, we hypothesize that: a) some of the clinical anti-tumor efficacy of single agent IL2 might be NK mediated; and b) a component of the IL2 induced antitumor effect may be due to ADCC activity facilitated by putative endogenous antitumor antibody. These IL2 induced mechanisms should also be reflected by favorable KIR/KIR-L and FcR genotype. These hypotheses will be tested by determining KIR/KIR-L and FcR genotypes, correlating genotypes with clinical outcome data, and assessing whether favorable genotypes are predictive of response. If this genotyping proves to be predictive of beneficial clinical effect, KIR, KIR-L and FcR genotyping can be used as an eligibility-screening test to: 1) improve the efficacy of these immunotherapy regimens, and 2) identify alternative/additional treatments for those individuals with unfavorable genotypes. Overall Hypothesis: We hypothesize that KIR/KIR-L data, independently and combined with FcR genotype data, can identify patients more likely to respond to: a) single agent mAb therapy for lymphoma, b) single agent IL2 treatment for renal cell carcinoma (RCC), and c) mAb + cytokine (IL2 + GM-CSF) therapy for neuroblastoma (NBL).. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Paul Sondel - Coordenador.
2011 - 2016
The Interactive International Neuroblastoma Risk Group (INRG)
Descrição: St. Baldrick?s Foundation.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Susan L Cohn - Coordenador.
2011 - 2015
Integrating Machine Learning and Physician Expertise for Breast Cancer Diagnosis
Descrição: The goal of this research is to develop novel machine learning techniques to integrate physician expertise and machine learned, logical rules in a graphical model that will accurately estimate breast cancer risk after breast biopsy. Our multidisciplinary team has a track record (including NIH funding and publications in the medical and computer science literature) illustrating an innovative research program that merges cutting edge machine learning algorithms including inductive logic programming and statistical relational learning to train graphical models to predict breast cancer risk. However, in contrast to prior work, we are testing a completely new methodology which we call Advice-Based-Learning (ABLe). By developing ABLe, our team aims to establish an innovative, collaborative cycle between machine-learning and physician expertise. We propose to test the hypothesis that this cycle will increase accuracy beyond what either the machine or human can accomplish alone. Specifically, we hypothesize first that a conventionally-trained graphical model trained with conventional machine learning first algorithms can accurately predict the risk of breast cancer after core biopsy and perform better than current clinical practice;a critical aim that is favorably foreshadowed by our new preliminary data but is labor intensive because we must perfect our unique clinical data that accurately represents clinical experience. Second, a graphical model trained using ABLe can incorporate multi-relational data with physician expertise and significantly improve the predictive accuracy over conventionally trained graphical models and current clinical practice. Third, our best graphical model trained with ABLe will accurately estimate the probability of malignancy after breast biopsy on new clinical cases better than physicians alone resulting in a tool that has the potential to improve care.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Elizabeth S Burnside - Coordenador.
2011 - 2014
Centennial Scholar Program
Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador.
2011 - 2013
The Interactive International Neuroblastoma Risk Group (INRG) Database
Descrição: The International Neuroblastoma Risk Group has collected data over 11,500 children diagnosed with neuroblastoma between 1980 and 2002. This project aims to create the Interactive INRG database (db), which will integrate data from multiple datasets pertaining to childhood neuroblastoma, including biological and genomic data, phenotypic measures, and clinical outcomes. It will leverage the current data collection and sharing procedures, introduce tools for facilitating data requests and data sharing, and create interfaces for data visualization and basic statistical analysis.  The Interactive INRGdb will provide unparallel opportunities for scientists involved in neuroblastoma research, and thus may ultimately provide the biologic clues required for the development of more effective treatment strategies. Subcontract with University of Chicago, Overall PI: S Cohn.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador.
2011 - 2012
AFF Text Mining Demonstration Project
Descrição: The present pilot study will test the hypothesis that using text data can lead to higher-accuracy ML models for predicting onset of AFF. As a proof of concept, we plan to develop and test a ML-based text mining approach for predictive modeling of AFF onset using Marshfield Clinic's textual EMR data.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / David C. Page - Coordenador.
2011 - 2011
School-Based Adolescent Immunization in the Chicago Public Schools
Descrição: Overall PI: K. Alexander (University of Chicago). Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador.
2009 - 2011
Service Oriented Discovery Architecture: Semantic Expansion Project
Descrição: National Institutes of Health award (3UL1 RR024999-03S5). Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Julian Solway - Coordenador.
2009 - 2010
Answering Information Needs in Workflow
Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador.Financiador(es): National Library of Medicine - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2007 - 2012
Institutional Clinical and Translational Award (UW Madison)
Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Tachinardi, U. - Integrante / Marc Drezner - Coordenador.
2006 - 2010
Answering Information Needs in Workflow
Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador / Kaufman, David R. - Integrante / Stephen B. Johnson - Integrante.Financiador(es): National Library of Medicine - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2006 - 2007
Managing Large Complex Data Streams in Outpatient Practice
Descrição: National Library of Medicine Grant (5R01 LM007663-02). Overall PI: Justin Starren. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador.Financiador(es): National Library of Medicine - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2006 - 2007
Informatics, Telemedicine and Education Demonstration project
Descrição: Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) Grant. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Steve Shea - Coordenador.
2005 - 2007
Mobile Decision Support for Awarded Practice Nursing
Descrição: National Library of Medicine Grant (1 R01 NR008903-01A1). Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Suzanne Bakken - Coordenador.
2005 - 2006
Cognition and Error Management for Critical Care
Descrição: National Institutes of Health Grant (5R01LM007894). Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Coordenador.
2003 - 2004
Persival ? Personalized Search and Summarization over Multimedia Information
Descrição: Graduate Research Assistant, National Science Foundation Grant (IIS-98-17434). Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Kathy McKeown - Coordenador.
2003 - 2003
VigiLENS Patient Health Monitoring- Phase II
Descrição: NASA Grant (HRSA / Office of Advanced Telemedicine Grant. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Edward H Shortliffe - Coordenador / Yves A. Lussier - Integrante.
2002 - 2002
VigiLENS Patient Health Monitoring
Descrição: NASA Grant (VCU-528753/PO P417322, HRSA / Office of Advanced Telemedicine Grant. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Edward H Shortliffe - Coordenador / Yves A. Lussier - Integrante.
2000 - 2002
Persival ? Personalized Search and Summarization over Multimedia Information
Descrição: Graduate Research Assistant, National Science Foundation Grant (IIS-98-17434). Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Eneida Abrantes Mendonça - Integrante / Kathy McKeown - Coordenador.