2021 - 2021
Evaluation of the Food Service provided in the 2nd Engineering Group
Descrição: The   food   system   of   the   Brazilian   Armed   Forces   is   governed   by   specific   rules   and   financed   by   federal collections.  In  this   context,   the  research  proposes  a   methodology   that  allows   evaluating  the  average level   of   satisfaction   of   users   of   the   foodservice   provided   in   the   Procurement   of   the   2nd   Engineering Group,   located   in   the   city   of   Manaus,   capital   of   Amazonas.   Therefore,   an   online   questionnaire   was developed   and   applied,   adapted   from   the   model   proposed   by   Barros   (2013),   using   four   quality dimensions: (i) product quality; (ii) Environment Conditions; (iii) facilities; and (iv) staff. The questionnaire has 19 items distributed among the four dimensions, in which the respondent indicated their level of satisfaction using the 10-point Likert scale. The questionnaire was available for ten days and obtained105 respondents. Data were analyzed using the mean and standard deviation of dimensions and items. It was   observed   that   the   ?staff?   dimension   obtained   the   best   evaluation,   and   the   item   with   the   best performance   was   ?staff'   hygiene?.   On   the   other   hand,   the   ?facilities?   dimension   had   the   worst performance, and the main item that needs improvement is ?access to people with disabilities?. After analyzing the data, the main conclusion of the survey was that the level of customer satisfaction with the mentioned food service is GOOD. In the end, improvement suggestions were made for five items considered to be the most critical. For future studies, it is suggested to evaluate the level of customer satisfaction with that service after applying the improvement actions suggested in this work.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Bruno Martins Leveau - Integrante.
2020 - 2021
600 days of Battle: New Zealand (NZ) performance and practices that saved lives against Covid-19
Descrição: To  Silva  (2020b),  among  108 well?evaluated  countries,  NZ  was  the eighth  best  nation during 180  days  of  battle  against  Covid-19,  and  one  year  after  that  publication,  on  29th October,  2021,  about 5,004,0026 lives  were  officially  lost  by  Covid?19,  while  NZ  only  reported 28  deaths (Worldometers, 2021).  To  complement  Gomes  da  Silva  (2020)  and Silva  (2020a;  2020b;  2021a;  2021b)  researches,  the main  aim  of  this  article  is  to  investigate  the  NZ  performance  and  management  practices  used  to  save lives  against  Covid-19.  It  uses  an  online  questionnaire  with  descriptive,  bibliographic  and  documentary approaches  to  identify  management  practices,  including  cultural  practices  and  Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs) adopted during the pandemic. The main performance is found by using the Fatality Total  Index  and  Resilience  Index  to  compare  NZ's  performance  with  43  countries  during 600  days of battle. As a result: 1) among the 44 countries, NZ was the most resilient and the second (FTI600=0.0165) best-best performer, after China (0.0066); 2) among 131 respondents living in NZ, 34.35% don ́t believe that cultural practices are decisive for the low rate of Covid?19 death, while 65.65% believe in that. From those  that  believe,  the  most  decisive  cultural  practices  were  wash  hands,  not  hug  in  public,  and  not shake hands; 3) for 131 respondents, the ten main policy measures adopted by the National Government that  saved  lives  against  the  virus  are  international  travel  control,  public  event  cancellations,  restriction on internal movement, public information campaigns, schools closures,  support the expansion of testing system,  wage  subsidies  for  workers,  workplace  closures,  increase  the  medical  and  personal  equipment capacity, and effective public-private collaboration. At the final, lessons are provided from 360 policies, measures,   programs,   projects,   acts/regulations,   innovative   products/services   identified,   with   the majority  led  by  the  Public  Sector  (66.7%),  followed  by  Corporations  (11.4%),  Universities  (8.9%), Others (8.3%), and Startups (4.7%).. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador.
2020 - 2021
How Vietnam is saving lives against Covid-19?
Descrição: It complements Silva's (2020b) research, which showed that among 108 well evaluated countries, the top benchmark nations against Covid19 are Vietnam, Taiwan, and Thailand. For example, on April 16,2021, around 3,011,574 lives were officially lost by Covid19, while Taiwan, Vietnam, and Thailand reported respectively only 11, 35, and 97 fatal cases (Worldometers, 2021). This article's main aim is to investigate the Vietnam performance and management practices used to save lives against Covid-19.The research uses an online questionnaire, which is descriptive with documentary and bibliographic approaches to identify management practices, including Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs) adopted against a pandemic. Also, the Fatality Total Index (SILVA, 2020b p. 563) was used to compare Vietnam's performance with 43 countries. Some results are 1) 210 NPIs were identified across the world against coronavirus; 2) Among the 44 countries, Vietnam was the second-best performer, after Taiwan; 3) among 107 respondents living in Vietnam, only 5.61% don ́t believe that cultural practices are decisive for the low rate of Covid19 death, while most (94.39%) believe in that. From those that believe, the most decisive cultural practices were: wear a mask, wash hands, not shake hands, not hug in public and few religious assemblies; 4) for 106 respondents living in Vietnam, the ten main policy measures adopted by the National Government that saved lives against the virus are international travel control, public information campaigns, schools closures, public event cancellations, integration with mass media, restriction on internal movement, effective public-private collaboration, increase the medical and personal equipment capacity, public transport reduction and combat fake news. At the final, ten golden lessons   are   provided,   from   340   policies,   measures,   programs,   projects,   actions,   innovative products/services identified, with the majority led by the Public Sector (71.2%), followed by Corporations(8.8%), Others (8.8%), Startups (6.2%), and Universities (5%).. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador.
2019 - 2020
36 Best Management Practices for Manaus-Amazon Urban Afforestation
Descrição: In 2010, the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics published a survey on urban afforestation in Brazil and Manaus city occupied the 4493rd place among the 5565 municipalities analyzed. Concerning the cities with more than 1 million habitants, Manaus was in the penultimate place, a frustrating result, since the city is the Amazon's capital, surrounded by the largest rainforest in the World. On the other hand, the cities with the best performances were Goiânia, Campinas, Belo Horizonte, Porto Alegre, and Curitiba. Given this context, the research aims to investigate the urban afforestation's best management practices to propose suggestions for Manaus' public managers. The data collection and analysis are based in the study "Urbanistic Characteristics of the Surroundings of the Domiciles", besides obtaining information and documents from articles and websites of the governments and partners of the best city investigated. After the intersection of information, 36 good urban management practices were cataloged and proposed to Manaus' public managers.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Juliana Assunção de Souza - Integrante.
2019 - 2020
Model to classify and reduce rework in the production of digital routers in a PIM Company.
Descrição: Rework has been a challenge for organizations, especially in Brazil, where there is still a lot of waste of resources (IDB, 2018; EMBRAPA, 2018). This case study aims to contribute to improving the classification and rework`s reduction in the sectors involved with the production of digital routers from the company EX da Amazônia (fictitious name), located in the Industrial Pole of Manaus. To this end, bibliographic research and methodology with seven phases, allowed to develop and apply a questionnaire to 71 employees who work in seven sectors involved with the processes of the organization's digital routers. The analysis was carried out with descriptive statistics, which allowed the identification of the best concepts for the term, the main problems, their causes, and effects, as well as reaching the main conclusion that the best model to classify and reduce reworks in the organization, must be developed by senior management, based on an interdepartmental approach, with diagnoses of the situation in each department, as well as the adoption of an annual plan to combat rework, supported by the use of information and communication technologies, awareness campaigns, continuous training, IT tools, quality approaches for improvement projects, audits, standardization, identification and dissemination
of good practices, and recognition of employees.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Ciellei Gomes de Sousa - Integrante.
2019 - 2020
Stencil control in the automatic insertion of a PIM Compan
Descrição: The article evaluated the control of Stencil in the subprocess of Printing of the SMD line of a company located in the Industrial Pole of Manaus (PIM), to provide subsidies to develop a computerized system. With computerization, the focus of employees will be directed to the activities of production and quality of manufactured products, also, the collection of process data, done in real-time, will allow managers to better monitor and take actions in the process. To this end, a case study, bibliographic research of articles, dissertations, and theses involving the theme, and documentary research (forms, records, etc.) with the sectors involved were used. The descriptive statistics method was applied, quality tools were used, aimed at identifying and solving problems such as PDCA, Pareto, Ishikawa Diagram, flow chart, and 5W2H. A study of the activities related to the control of the Stencil was carried out, of the documentation used in the process, as well as of the factors and causes related to the effective Stencil control. Among the results, 24 causes affect the performance of the Stencil control, concluding that the main failures were human, due to the prioritization of production goals by the employees, leaving the other activities in the background, which is why the 24 guidelines proposed for the computerization of this process become relevant, some of which are: defining means to identify each Stencil using a bar code or QR code; do not allow the use of the Stencil if one of the activities unfinished in the process; stop production when an activity is not performed; digitize the documents used in this process; create an automatic notification to those responsible, when an action is necessary, etc.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Cláudio César Vasconcelos Barros - Integrante.
2019 - 2020
How to reduce food waste in the B_M company`s restaurant
Descrição: About a third of all food produced in the world is wasted. To reduce this unfortunate number, several companies are trying to do their part. The article analyzes the causes of food waste in the B_M company restaurant, located in the Industrial Pole of Manaus, to propose actions to improve its environmental performance. The research is of an applied nature, with data collection and analysis using qualitative and quantitative approaches. The procedures involve case study, documentary and bibliographic research, and survey application, based on a questionnaire composed of 2 sections and nine questions, applied randomly at lunchtime with 300 employees. After analyzing the data, it was concluded that waste is related to the preparation and menu of meals, occurring effectively in the consumption phase, when 58% of respondents leave food scraps on the plate, due to the bad taste of the meals (81 %), not pleasant menu (41%) and for over-serving (25%). The main foods left on the plate are beef (34%), chicken meat (32%), rice (23%), beans (20%), and fish (20%). In the end, six suggestions were given to managers to reduce food waste at the restaurant.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Benitis Moreira de Souza - Integrante.
2019 - 2019
Evasion of Production Engineering students at FT/UFAM
Descrição: Keyword:Industrial Engineering; University`s Evasion; Causes;PublishedDate: 10/31/2019Page.551-564Vol 7No 102019AbstractThe undergraduate degree in Industrial Engineering at the Faculty of Technology (FT) of the Federal University of Amazonas (UFAM) completed 15 years in the first semester of 2019. During this period, enrolled 837 students, of which 238 (28%) have already graduated, 335 (40 %) continue to study and 263 (32%) have left the course. Given this percentage of dropout and the need to research more about the topic, this article aims to investigate the main causes of abandonment in this course in order to propose strategies to minimize the problem. The method used was the Survey, which applied a five-part  electronic  questionnaire  sent  to  203  dropout  students  who  had  e-mail.  After  analyzing  the answers  of  39  (19.21%), it  was  concluded that  most  students  did not  receive  vocational orientation before  joining  the  University  and  the  main  reasons  that  influenced  the  students  to  quit  the  course were the didactic-pedagogical deficiency of the teachers, the difficulty in conciliating study and work, and the course did not satisfy their expectations. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Jéssica Barbosa da Silva - Integrante.
2019 - 2019
How to evaluate the services of a small beauty salon in Manaus?
Descrição: The research evaluates the performance of the services provided by the Nivea Mangabeira Space Salon, located in the Redenção district of Manaus City, capital of Amazonas. To this end, for 20 days in November 2019, a questionnaire was applied to 50 clients, containing twenty items referring to the five quality dimensions: Tangible Aspects, Reliability, Responsibility, Assurance, and Empathy. The collected data were analyzed using descriptive statistics and after analyzing the results, it was concluded that empathy is the best performing dimension, indicating that professionals have a great relationship with clients and that they feel very well treated. On the other hand, the Tangible Aspects dimension had the lowest performance, even though the hall structure being considered good, it can be improved. Suggested improvements by respondents include parking, a wider place, offering snacks, courtesies or promotions for birthday people, always having coffee, doing micro-pigmentation wire-to-wire and hiring more professionals for the most demanding days. As for management, it is recommended that managers pursue improvement courses in small and medium business administration at SEBRAE-AM, CETAM or in another establishment, to professionalize its management, leaving a small family-based company to maybe become a national franchise.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / CRISTHINA OLIVEIRA GUEDES, KAREN - Integrante.
2019 - 2019
Internships of FT/UFAM Industrial Engineering student
Descrição: The article identifies the profile of paid internships developed in the last two and a half years by the students of the Industrial Engineering course of the Faculty of Technology of the Federal University of Amazonas. To this end, consulting the records of the Department of Student Assistance (DAEST) of UFAM, responsible for the trainees' contracts, revealed the existence of 107 students who signed contracts to perform internship during this period. Besides, a questionnaire with 3-section and 15-questions (Appendix 1) was applied to students via email, classroom, event, and virtual groups to collect internship information. After collecting and analyzing the data, the following conclusions were reached: more than half of the interns are male, most of them interned in the industrial sector; the average monthly value of the internship scholarships is R $ 1,175, and it was identified Honda and other nine companies that best remunerate their interns; most develop their roles in Operations and Process Engineering, Quality Engineering, Product Engineering or Logistics; the course subjects that most assisted during the internship were: quality management, production planning and control, production system and maintenance management.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Dalzira de Souza Pereira - Integrante.
2019 - 2019
A methodology proposal to develop a research project for innovation system
Descrição: Around the world many students or professionals interested in innovation system field dream to have a master, doctor or post doctorate experience in a top university. However, it is noted that are difficulties to identify a top university and propose a good research for a potential supervisor. So, the aim of this article is to propose a methodology to help readers to write a research plan concerning innovation system in order to submit into top universities selection process. In order to do so, a basic conceptual methodology with 8 steps and guidance will be presented by using real case, focused on The Best UK Universities Management Practices to Foster Local Entrepreneurship and Innovation, a basic post doctorate project that the author submmited and was approved in 2018 by the Directors of The Manchester Institute of Innovation Research at Alliance Manchester Business School in the University of Manchester. It was concluded that there is no a universal standard to write a research project concerning to innovation system field or even other field, each university or fund/grand foundation develops its own model. So the conceptual methodology doesn?t want to replace other methodologies, but only to serve as a guide to those candidates that wish to write a proposal and follow the orientations given in this article.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador.
2018 - 2018
Profile of Final Course Projects of Industrial Engineering students at FT/UFAM
Descrição: The research analyzes the profile of academic works defended by final year students of the Production Engineering course at FT/UFAM, in order to provide useful information for improving the offer of this discipline over time.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Jeniffer Dayana Martins de Oliveira - Integrante.
2018 - 2018
Profile of Supervised Internship Reports of the FT/UFAM Industrial Engineering Course
Descrição: It  analyzed  the  profile  of  the  Supervised  Internship  reports  delivered  by  students  of  the  Industrial  Engineering course at the Faculty of Technology of the Federal University of Amazonas (FT/UFAM), to provide useful information to the course department, as well as providing knowledge and reflection on how the discipline has been approached over time. The research is applied, documentary, using descriptive statistics along with data obtained from the collection of internship reports approved between 2008/1 to 2018/1. After analyzing the results, the main conclusions were that the average score of the 469 reports is 8.56, the industry is the segment in which the majority of the internships (76%) were carried out, while the Operations Engineering, and Production Process, Organizational Engineering, Quality Engineering, Logistics, and Work Engineering were the main areas of Industrial Engineering in which the students interned.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Leonardo Carneiro da Cunha Custódio - Integrante.
2018 - 2018
MASP to control paper waste in an Institution X in Manaus
Descrição: The  paper  analyzes  the  reduction  of  waste  of  A4  paper  used  in  prints  in  the  finance  section  of  a department of Institution X. Theresearch is a case study in which the collection and analysis of data follow  the  steps  of  the  Method  Analysis  and  Problem  Solving  (MASP)  in  conjunction  with  the  tools: Brainstorming, Check Sheet, Cause and Effect Diagram, Pareto Chart and 5W1H. After analyzing the data, it is concluded that operator error, faulty printer tray and sudden change of document content account for 77.52% of paper waste in the department. In the end, for each of these cases, it is proposed an  action  plan  that  together  with  other proposals,  total  seven  actions  of  improvements  for  the managers of the department in question.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Dalyla Mendes de Rezende - Integrante.
2017 - 2017
Analysis of the satisfaction level of buyers of concentrated softeners from a PIM company
Descrição: The survey analyzed the level of byers´ satisfaction with concentrated softener from Multinacional X company in Manaus, and proposed improvement suggestions for company´s managers.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Clara de Abreu Vasconcelos - Integrante.
2017 - 2017
How to evaluate the Bolsa Universidade Program in Manaus
Descrição: The research evaluates the satisfaction level of the services provided by the Manaus Municipal Public Service  School  and  Socio-Educational  Inclusion  (ESPI)  to  the  scholarship  holders  of  the  Bolsa Universidade Program. To this end, an online questionnaire adapted from the SERVPERF model was applied,  using  five  quality  dimensions:  tangible,  reliability,  effectiveness,  assurance  and  empathy.  It has  20  items  distributed  among  the  dimensions,  where  the  respondent  indicated  their  level  of satisfaction through a 10-point Likert scale. It was available for eight days and had 442 respondents. After  data  collection,  the  Cronbach's  alpha  reliability  test  was  performed.  Then,  the  data  were analyzed using the average and standard deviation of dimensions and items. It was observed that the best  dimension  was  reliability,  and  the  item  with  the  best  performance  was  the  reliable documentation  management.  On  the  other  hand,  the  dimension  that  needs  improvement  is effectiveness,  and  the  item  that needs urgent improvement is waiting in line for documentation delivery. After analyzing the data, the main conclusion was that the level of satisfaction was considered Good. In the end, suggestions for improvement were made for the critical items. For future studies, it is suggested to evaluate the level of satisfaction after applying the improvement actions.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Juliana Ferreira - Integrante.
2017 - 2017
Parameters to reduce waste in the paper curl process in a PIM company
Descrição: In a highly competitive environment among companies, standardization of processes has been one of the means to reduce errors, defects, and costs. Thus, the objective of this study is to investigate what is the best standard with parameters to be  applied  to  the  manufacture  of  corrugated  cardboard  in a  company  in  the  Industrial  Pole  of  Manaus  (PIM),  aiming  to reduce  the  number  of  wastes  from  this  process.  The  data  were  collected  from  the  production  management  system  of company X and analyzed through brainstorming with the employees of the studied process. At the end of the research it was  concluded  that  the  parameters  that  most  influence  the  generation  of  approximately  9  types  of  scrap  are:  (a) Temperature of the cover and core; b) Press pressure; c) Corrugate pressure; d) Glue crack; e) Pressure of the coil door brakes.  To  reduce  factory  waste,  a  standardized  list  was  proposed  containing  the  parameters  for  each  composition, observing the peculiarities of this production process. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Felipe do Nascimento Vaz - Integrante.
2016 - 2016
Energy Efficiency Test at a PIM Company
Descrição: It  is  a  case  study  conducted  in  company  X  of  the  electronic  branch  located  in  the  Industrial  Pole  of Manaus (PIM), the capital of Amazonas?Brazil. The problem was the need to develop a benchmarking involving   energy efficiency   inspection   tests   on   televisions.   The   objective   is   to   compare   the performance  of  the  standard  method  and  the  new  method  of  performing  the  energy  efficiency inspection test. To this end, quality tools were applied with data collected from the use of the time study of each test step. After data collection and analysis, it was concluded that the new test: a) has 67% of its steps performed automatically and 43% manually, its average lead time is 4h14min34, a gain of  33.5%  in  total  time  required  to  perform  the  test;  b)  can  be  developed  with  the  application  of Brainstorming, Ishikawa Diagram, GUT Matrix, PDCA, Vertical Flowchart in conjunction with Chrono-analysis. It is worth highlighting the importance of the local top management support so that each of these tools is used with autonomy and creativity by the collaborators involved in the project.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Ismael Victor Lira de Souza e Souza - Integrante.
2016 - 2016
How to Reduce Motorcycle Theft in Parking at a Manaus Shopping?
Descrição: At shopping X, located on one of the busiest avenues in the city of Manaus, it was verified that expenses with reimbursement for robbery and theft in parking areas grew considerably in 2015. Thus, this article proposed low-cost actions to reduce robberies and thefts in the parking areas of this mall with a higher incidence of accidents.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Caroline Sousa de Oliveira - Integrante.
2016 - 2016
Variability reduction study in a beer production process in PIM
Descrição: The project investigated and standardized a method to reduce the variability of brewing time within a company's brewhouse in Manaus.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Amanda Ramos da Costa - Integrante.
2016 - 2016
Testing an Internal Supply System in a PIM`s company
Descrição: The project analyzed  the  implementation  of  an  internal  material  supply  system  in  an  electronics company installed at the Manaus Industrial Pole (PIM). This system is a lean internal logistics model with the  leveled replacement  of  materials  and defined  frequency, facilitating  the  communication of the  people  involved  and  ensuring  the  efficient  use  of  the  productive  area.  The  method  used  was  a practical  application  adapted  from  the  one  proposed  by  Harris  et  al.  (2004)  to  control  the  internal movement  of  materials.  As  a  result,  this  paper  surveyed  the  key  advantages  of  adopting  the  new supply system and identified potential opportunities for improvement.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Dandara Gomes Pereira - Integrante.
2016 - 2016
Evaluation of the Integrated Electronic Standardization System of a Thermoelectric in Manaus
Descrição: The research evaluated the integrated electronic standardization system of Thermoelectric X located in the city of Manaus-Am.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Elen Souza da Silva - Integrante.
2016 - 2016
Assessment of Accessibility in Toilets at the Faculty of Technology at UFAM
Descrição: The survey evaluated the accessibility to the sanitary facilities of the Faculty of Technology, according to the NBR9050/2015. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Ana Paula Paiva do Vale - Integrante.
2015 - 2016
Diagnosis of Accessibility in FT-UFAM Classrooms
Descrição: The project analyzed the problems of accessibility in the classrooms of the Faculty of Technology at UFAM, based on NBR 9050:2004, in order to propose suggestions for improvements to the Faculty's managers.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Integrante / Nilson Rodrigues Barreiros - Coordenador / Joseana Vinhote Melo - Integrante.
2013 - 2014
Study of the causes of non-treatment of non-compliances in a PIM company.
Descrição: The objective of the research was to diagnose the causes of non-treatment of non-conformities in a PIM company, in order to propose suggestions for improvements to the organization's managers.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Maysa da Silva Teixeira - Integrante.
2013 - 2014
Cost Reduction of R-206 Enamel supplied to Company X of PIM.
Descrição: The research analyzed the cost of Esmate R-206 and provided improvement proposals for the Product Assurance sector of a PIM company.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Rebeca Soares Martins - Integrante.
2013 - 2014
Analysis and improvement proposal in the Product Warranty sector in an electronics company.
Descrição: The research recommended improvements for the Product Assurance sector at a PIM electronics company.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Naíza Alvino Castro dos Reis - Integrante.
2013 - 2014
Standardization of Financial System Processes at the Alternative Institute of Petrópolis.
Descrição: The project investigated and implemented a procedure manual for the Financial system of the NGO Alternativo de Petrópolis.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Ronilva Lina Reis Botelho - Integrante.
2013 - 2013
Reduction of refrigerant gas waste in a PIM white goods assembly company.
Descrição: The research analyzed the Reduction of refrigerant gas waste in a PIM white goods assembler company.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Mariana Sarmanho de Oliveira Lima - Integrante / Joyce Jacqueline de Oliveira Lima - Integrante.
2013 - 2013
Application of the NR12 Standard in a Sand Conversion Company, UNITEC-AM
Descrição: The project investigated the Application of the NR12 Standard in a Sand Conversion Company, UNITEC-AM, in order to propose improvements to the organization's managers.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Mariana Sarmanho de Oliveira Lima - Integrante / Ericson dos Santos Olimpo - Integrante.
2013 - 2013
Study on the improvement of the crater defect in the painting sector of a company in the PIM two-wheeled pole.
Descrição: The project investigated how the application of Quality tools contributed to reduce the crater defect in the painting sector of a company in the PIM two-wheeled sector.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Mariana Sarmanho de Oliveira Lima - Integrante / Gustavo Rodrigues Guimarães - Integrante.
2012 - 2013
Model for performance analysis of the CCQ Program in a PIM electro-electronic company
Descrição: The Research developed a model to assess the performance level of the Quality Control Circle Program adopted by a company in the Industrial Pole of Manaus.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos:  / Mestrado profissional: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Mário Alves Sobral Junior - Integrante.
2012 - 2013
Model to evaluate the effectiveness of the IFAM Internship Program
Descrição: The internship aims to improve the student's abilities through practical activities, where one can apply the lessons learned in school/university. In this sense, the IFAM Internship Program/Center should provide quality services to the community, fulfilling their goals effectively. However, in 2011, it was noted the absence of a system to evaluate the effectiveness of the program. The main objective of this research is to develop a model for evaluating the effectiveness of the IFAM Internship Program/Center from the perspective of the student, to improve the services provided by the program. To collect data, a questionnaire was designed with closed and open questions, based on the SERVQUAL model developed by Parasuraman et al. (1985). The research sample was 99 students of technical courses, full-time courses as well as PROEJA (Adult courses). The study showed that all dimensions of service quality of the IFAM Internship Program/Center have negative gap, thus revealing the need for re planning actions by the managers of the program, including interventions of teachers, to clarify the main questions of the students about the internship; planning meetings with new trainees, providing practical situations in the IFAM laboratories where the student can learn and experience the challenges of laboring world. In this sense, it is recommended studies be made to hear the opinion of the companies which use the services of IFAM Internship Program /Center for admitting the students.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos:  / Mestrado profissional: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Maria Carolina da Costa Monteiro - Integrante.
2012 - 2013
Model to assess the effectiveness of IFAM Manaus training.
Descrição: The project developed a model to evaluate the impact of training provided to active administrative technicians of the Federal Institute of Amazonas (IFAM), located in the Center of Manaus, Amazonas, in the years 2010 and 2011. The research has an applied, descriptive, qualitative and quantitative nature. The theoretical referential included nine training evaluation models, among them, the most appropriate for this study were the models of Kirkpatrick (1976) and Hamblin (1978), Andrade (1982) and Castro (1999). A questionnaire was applied to 42 technicians and 15 chiefs, whose requirements used to assess the impact of training, were: job behavior, learning, performance, support for transferring learning and work. The main conclusion was that the overall average of the requirement responses showed no relevant differences. However, by making an individual analysis of the items of each requirement, it was possible to verify the existence of some differences in the evaluations about the impact of the training, especially about: interpersonal relationships at work, availability of equipment in the knowledge transfer, the importance of the position in company development, more positive attitudes at work and responsiveness to changes at work. On the other hand, there was good alignment of the perception between managers and technicians about the impact of training on meeting demands, improvement in professional performance, operationalization of tasks, increased suggestions for improvement and motivation to apply knowledge.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos:  / Mestrado profissional: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Marlise Pinto Azevedo - Integrante.
2012 - 2012
How to evaluate the quality of suppliers in a PIM`s Company X
Descrição: The research was carried out in Company X that operates in the electronics industry at Manaus Industrial Pole (PIM). The objective is to propose a system of indicators to evaluate the quality of suppliers, in order to enable the relationship`s continuous improvement among company and its suppliers. Based in the collection and analyzed data, it was possible to identify six successful cases of suppliers' quality assessment indicators system, which permitted to propose, in partnership with managers, a model that does not need a high cost investment to implement it. Finally, it was suggested to company: a) computerize this process; b) to train employees that work in quality material sector; c) to strengthen relationships with current and future suppliers by showing the company's new vision and model. Doing so, it is believed that the company studied will have a great advance in the field of raw material acquisition, thus obtaining more quality and may be more competitive in the market.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Tamires Priscila Souza dos Santos - Integrante.
2012 - 2012
Impact assessment Impact of Autonomous Maintenance and Production Line in a two-wheeled pole company
Descrição: The project evaluated the Impact of Autonomous Maintenance on the Production Line of a company in the two-wheel hub of the Manaus Industrial Pole.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Integrante / Mariana Sarmanho de Oliveira Lima - Coordenador / Aglei Duques Maciel Filho - Integrante.
2011 - 2012
Evaluation of Production Engineering professors at FT/UFAM
Descrição: The research evaluated the level of student satisfaction with the quality of services provided by professors of the Industrial Engineering course at the UFAM Faculty of Technology, in order to propose suggestions for improvement.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Roberta Costa da Silva - Integrante.
2011 - 2011
Petrópolis Economic, Educational and Professional Profile
Descrição: The project identified the socio-economic, educational and professional profile of the residents of the Bairro de Petrópolis, in order to support the development of social projects and qualification courses by the NGO Alternativo de Petrópolis.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (6)  / Especialização: (2)  / Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Fundação Inter Americana (IAF) - Cooperação.
2011 - 2011
Quality of Service Provided by an Information Technology Service Company
Descrição: The project analyzed the quality of the IT service provided by an outsourced company at Manaus Energia.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Carlos Augusto Batalha do Nascimento - Integrante.
2010 - 2011
Assessment of Outsourced Food Service Quality at HUGV
Descrição: Research developed a model to assess the level of quality of food services provided by an outsourced company at the Getúlio Vargas University Hospital.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos:  / Mestrado profissional: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Mithell Souto Maior - Integrante.
2010 - 2011
Participative approach to graduate students evaluate FT/UFAM Services
Descrição: It has a participatory approach to continuously evaluate the level of satisfaction of Industrial Engineering students with the main services provided at the Faculty of Technology of the Federal University of Amazonas (FT/UFAM). To this end, studies were conducted to learn about existing services at the Faculty and to identify methodologies to assess customer satisfaction, resulting in the creation of a seven-step methodology that allowed veteran students of the Quality Management discipline to develop a questionnaire model with seven requirements and forty-nine items, which was applied to 122 students of the Industrial Engineering Course in June 2010. After the analysis of the results, conclusions and recommendations were generated, among them, it can be stated that the methodology and its data collection model can serve as evaluation tools to contribute to the process of continuous improvement of the services provided at FT/UFAM. Moreover, the methodology proved to be efficient in its application and also to motivate the students, once they felt valued and could understand the importance of participative management in the planning of any organization.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (32)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (0)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador.
2010 - 2011
Organizational Climate and Quality of Services in the Nutrition Sector at HUGV-AM
Descrição: Research developed a model to assess the level of organizational climate of employees who work in the Nutrition Sector at HUGV-AM.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos:  / Mestrado profissional: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Ariete Cavalcante Silva - Integrante.
2009 - 2010
Methodology for Programming Metrological Services in a Calibration Laboratory
Descrição: The Research developed a methodology to program metrological services in the Calibration Laboratory of IPEM-AM.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos:  / Mestrado profissional: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Diego Freitas da Silva - Integrante.
2007 - 2007
Quality Management System Implementation Process: A case study at Placibras da Amazônia Ltda.
Descrição: The project investigated the process of implementing the Quality Management System at Placibras da Amazônia Ltda, as well as presented suggestions for improvement to the company's top management.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (0)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / ARIAL AMANCIO - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 1
2007 - 2007
Motivation of Employees at Company X with the ISO 9001:2000 Maintenance Process.
Descrição: The project identified the level of Company X´s emploees motivation with the maintenance of ISO 9001:2002, as well as proposed improvement suggestions to top managers.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (0)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Simara A. Montenegro - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 1
2006 - 2007
Development of actions to disseminate metrological culture in the state of Amazonas (DIAMETRO)
Descrição: DIAMETRO aims to (1) diagnose the demand for Calibration, Testing and Conformity Certification services in the main companies and institutions providing services located in the Industrial Pole of Manaus; (2) study the suppy capability of providers concerning to Calibration, Testing and Conformity Certification services in Manaus; 3) Support the dissemination of metrological culture in the Amazon State.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2)  / Especialização: (1) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado do Amazonas - Bolsa.
2005 - 2005
Diagnosis of Implementation of the INJET System at FCC do Brasil Company.
Descrição: The project analyzed the process of implementing the INJET system at FCC do Brasil Company, as well as presented suggestions for improvement to the company's top managers.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (0)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Heron Castro - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 1
2005 - 2005
Case Study of the Corporate Social Responsibility Awareness Process at Manaus Energia SA
Descrição: The project studied the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Awareness Process at Manaus Energia SA, as well as presented suggestions for improvement to the company's top managers. In 2005, it was considered by the Ethos Valor Institute as one of the five best undergraduate research projects on the topic of CSR.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (0)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Carla Albuquerque Dias - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 1
2005 - 2005
Evaluation of the Quality of Services Provided by Manaus Paulinas Bookstore
Descrição: The project investigated with 100 customers their level of satisfaction with the services provided by Manaus Paulinas Bookstore, as well as presented strengths, weaknesses and suggestions for improvement.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (0)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Elisangela da Costa Lima - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 1
2004 - 2005
Development of a diagnostic study of the demands and potential of local supply of technological services related to calibration, testing and conformity certification for the purpose of implementing the Priority Program called TIB.
Descrição: The project identified the local demand and supply potential for calibration, testing and conformity certification services.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado do Amazonas - Bolsa.
2004 - 2004
Study on the Implementation Process of Social Responsibility at Phillips da Amazônia
Descrição: The project investigated the Social Responsibility Implementation Process at Phillips da Amazônia, a company certified by SA8000 and considered by EXAME magazine as an example of a citizen company.
Suggestions for improvement were presented to the company's HR Manager.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (0)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Jonas Gomes da Silva - Coordenador / Bárbara Paixão - Integrante.