2013 - 2013
AudLibras
Descrição: Sistema de tradução em tempo real de voz (captura de som) para LIBRAS (animação gráfica). Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Ronaldo Ferreira dos Anjos Filho - Integrante / Eduardo Freitas - Coordenador.
2011 - 2013
Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento de Ambiente Baseado em Técnicas de Realidade Virtual e Aumentada para Simulação em Subestações de Energia
Descrição: The visualization team of the project "Research and development of a virtual and augmented reality based environment for simulation of procedures in electrical substations" focuses elaborating a 3D modeling methodology of electrical substations through the development of 3D reconstruction techniques using images, the Microsoft Kinect and laser scanning. This project is executed in collaboration with Eletrobras Furnas and LACTEC, being ANEEL the funding agency.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2)  / Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Ronaldo Ferreira dos Anjos Filho - Integrante / Artur Santos - Integrante / Mozart  Williams Santos Almeida - Integrante / Veronica Teichrieb - Coordenador / Francisco Paulo Magalhaes Simoes - Integrante / Mariana Gonçalves Maciel Pinheiro - Integrante / Rafael Alves Roberto - Integrante / Lucas Silva Figueiredo - Integrante / Tullio José de Souza Lucena - Integrante / Daniel Queiroz de Freitas - Integrante.Financiador(es): Centrais Elétricas - Sede - Outra.
2011 - 2013
NAVEGANTE
Descrição: The NAVEGANTE project aims to build a tool for aiding the hydrodynamics design of submerged ships advancing and maneuvering. Therefore, it is supported by analytical-numerical and experimental methods configured and validated in the context of case studies to be defined in collaboration with the Brazilian Navy. The RANS method will be applied regarding the analytical-numerical research topic, and as experimental method it will be used meshless particle methods. NAVEGANTE is executed in collaboration with CTMSP, USP and DEMEC UFPE. Funding is done by FINEP.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Ronaldo Ferreira dos Anjos Filho - Coordenador / Mozart  Williams Santos Almeida - Integrante / Veronica Teichrieb - Integrante / José Maria Barbosa - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundação de Apoio à Universidade de São Paulo - Outra.
2008 - 2011
VWEB
Projeto certificado pelo(a) coordenador(a) Judith Kelner em 26/07/2012.
Descrição: The objective of the VWEB project is to develop a multi-platform screen reader, for blind users. This project involves the study of accessibility design guidelines, speech synthesis and screen reading on Operating Systems such as Linux or Windows.
According to an IBGE (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics) census, almost 7% of the brazilian population are visually impaired. Information access is a fundamental right to all people. Due to evolution of computer systems, graphics interfaces and software became widely used, but the use of the mouse and this kind of interface made more people use the computer, and, at the same time, created a bigger barrier for visually impaired users. The screen reader enables visually impaired people to use some computer programs with graphics interfaces, retrieving information and selecting what is going to be dictated. The output is transformed from text to speech through a speech synthesizer that imitates human voice, making user interation easier.
The main objective of this project is to develop a screen reader prototype, for visually impaired people. This prototype, called VWEB, is composed by two modules, a portuguese speech synthesizer and a multi-platform screen reader, for Windows and Linux Operating Systems.
Technologies: Python and wxWidgets.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (4)  / Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Ronaldo Ferreira dos Anjos Filho - Integrante / Gabriel Fernandes de Almeida - Integrante / Artur Santos - Integrante / Felipe Breyer - Integrante / Judith Kelner - Coordenador / Guilherme Moura - Integrante / André Ferreira - Integrante / Luis Vasconcelos - Integrante.
2007 - 2008
Vis-Gas
Descrição: (This project was a continuation of Vis-Petro)
Vis-Petro is a a tool created to support and facilitate the complex task of petroleum well planning in ultra deep water, through the drilling stage. This goal is achieved through the integration of diverse modules, which allow terrain and reservoir surface editing and well design definition, including pull points, equipments, tools and fluids, using an interactive three-dimensional user interface and a two-dimensional menu used with the desktop version of Vis-Petro. Ocean waves simulation enhances visual quality of the application. The user interaction can also be enriched by the use of immersive virtual reality visualization and interaction interfaces, easily attached to the application through the use of HMD and data glove. Furthermore, Vis-Petro architecture is flexible, allowing the substitution of the graphical library with little effort.
In order to allow the collaborative use of Vis-Petro by diverse experts, the architecture of a framework for collaborative applications is being specified, named FFORCE or Framework for Collaborative Environments. FFORCE was conceived with the purpose of aiding the development of real time collaborative applications. Beyond distribution and scalability requirements, FFORCE aims implementing specialized processing modules, such as physics simulation. This allows that since there are available in the system core computers physics processing cards, such as the Ageia PhysX, diverse clients have exhibited in their terminals physics behaviors. In this project there are approached the areas of real time collaboration, distributed systems and collaborative virtual reality.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (4)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2) . Integrantes: Ronaldo Ferreira dos Anjos Filho - Integrante / Gabriel Fernandes de Almeida - Integrante / Artur Santos - Integrante / Felipe Breyer - Integrante / Mozart  Williams Santos Almeida - Integrante / Rodrigo Farias - Integrante / Veronica Teichrieb - Integrante / Judith Kelner - Coordenador / Marcio Bueno - Integrante.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2007 - 2008
ReActive
Descrição: Among last generation games, physics simulation engines are a mandatory requisite for realism, and soon will be used on applications other than 3D virtual worlds, in order to display more realistic behaviors. This dissertation describes the Reactive, an engine developed to be applied on applications that use physics simulation. Incorporating innovative elements, such as the concept of reactivity instead of the iterative approach for applications which execute physics calculations, and an abstraction layer for third-party engines, the ReActive focuses on diminishing the amount of code to be maintained. It is also possible to extend the available functionalities, define custom behaviors for rigid bodies or joints and implement physics simulation in collaborative environments. To specify the Reactive engine, a study regarding the main physics simulation and graphics engines will be presented, and also some proof of concept implemented prototypes, which allow the use of physics engines with collaborative environments.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (4)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (1) . Integrantes: Ronaldo Ferreira dos Anjos Filho - Integrante / Gabriel Fernandes de Almeida - Integrante / Artur Santos - Integrante / Mozart  Williams Santos Almeida - Integrante / Rodrigo Farias - Integrante / Veronica Teichrieb - Integrante / Judith Kelner - Coordenador / Thiago Souto Maior Cordeiro de Farias - Integrante.
2006 - 2006
Realidade aumentada para análise do movimento
Projeto certificado pelo(a) coordenador(a) Veronica Teichrieb em 07/05/2015.
Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Ronaldo Ferreira dos Anjos Filho - Integrante / Veronica Teichrieb - Coordenador.
2005 - 2006
A2 - Augmented Ambients
Descrição: A2 stands for Augmented Ambient. The Augmented Ambient project aims to construct a highly interactive mobility scenario based on augmented reality applications running on heterogeneous multimedia devices. Mobility is made available through ambient networks, which are dynamic computer networks. A case study has been performed about a virtual museum, where users make use of ambient networks concepts to join a service network that includes art pieces visualization, interview broadcasting, chat between museum network users, and remote live auctions.
These services are implemented in a desktop, a Pocket PC and a Symbian OS platform. The desktop platform used is miva, a wearable computer built by GRVM. Each platform has its own limitations related to processing power and content exhibition, which are considered during media exchange. Some libraries have been built to simplify and speed up the development in all platforms. Namely, OgreAR, OGRE4PPC, CIDA and ART4SymbianOS libraries have been developed, beyond the ambient networks related software infrastructure. Sophisticated realistic interfaces, based on physics behavior, are used with the desktop platform.
The interview service is a very complex one, that uses fiducial markers to show up the three-dimensional model of the interviewer. Interview video output and audio are broadcasted. The actor?s image is based on video channels that are interpolated by an image server using the markers? orientation to establish the correct mix between the video flows captured by low cost cameras surrounding the actor.  
This project has a strong innovative nature due to the diversity of technologies integrated and the tendency of utilization of systems with a critical feature of mobility and interactivity.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (4)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2) . Integrantes: Ronaldo Ferreira dos Anjos Filho - Integrante / Gabriel Fernandes de Almeida - Integrante / Veronica Teichrieb - Integrante / Judith Kelner - Coordenador / Thiago Souto Maior Cordeiro de Farias - Integrante / João Paulo Silva do Monte Lima - Integrante / Marcio Bueno - Integrante / Eduardo Apolinario - Integrante / Fernando Maymone - Integrante / Severino Gomes Neto - Integrante.