2016 - 2020
Analyzing the influence of sexist stereotypes around the adolescent women to the choice of a STEM career
Descrição: The doctorate project analyses how sexist stereotypes influence women's career choice, especially considering the STEM area or Science and Technology area as known in Brazil. Among the findings of sexism in society, social conditions, and professional choices, would it be reasonable to think that the choice of adolescent women for a profession is directly influenced by sexism? The descriptive and transversal research had a questionnaire with a scale that measures sexism at work (Scale G). 696 adolescents from public and private schools participated. The results showed that sexism does not influence choice. However, the rejection of women by the S&T area persists. The result of the averages on the scale indicates the presence of sexism, with the need for further studies on the effects of the functioning of sexism on women.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: Erika Giacometti Rocha Berribili - Integrante / Gomes, Luiz Roberto - Coordenador.
2013 - 2015
Sociocultural and cognitive impact of the digital media and the Internet in education
Descrição: In Latin America scenario, including Brazil, the 2010 year have seen a growing trend towards to increase the population access to digital devices with internet. This research examines the sociocultural and cognitive impacts among adolescents with the mediation of the intensive use of digital media and chose the construction of knowledge for school education as a research field. We therefore assume the following specific objectives: a) understanding the presence and use of digital media in the school context, addressing the main characteristics and difficulties; b) investigating the social impact of spatial mobility and social interactions according to type of digital media; c) analyzing a cognitive impact (metacognition) observing study strategies according to the adolescents' daily access time, and d) examining the cultural impact of digital media use through the preferences of content by gender on the Internet. The research is descriptive in nature and the methodology is both qualitative and quantitative. There were 760 participants from secondary schools and 6 teachers. Instruments: questionnaire, and interviews.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (1) Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: Erika Giacometti Rocha Berribili - Integrante / Daniel Mill - Coordenador.Financiador(es): CAPES - Centro Anhanguera de Promoção e Educação Social - Bolsa.