2013 - Atual
AAL4ALL - Ambient Assisted Living for All
Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Elisangela Brito Pessoa Vilar - Integrante / Miguel Sales Dias - Coordenador.
2008 - 2012
Future safety	warnings ? Virtual Reality in the study of technology-based warnings
Descrição: A great deal of research has been done on traditional safety warnings, but now new warnings are being enhanced by technology. These technology-based warnings can be dynamic, multimodal, adaptive, personalized and interactive. They will be more effective to capture and/or maintain attention, facilitate comprehension, memorization, motivation of users and promoting consonant behavior. They will be more inclusive, adapting to the needs of information, compensating the users' sensori-perceptive and cognitive limitations.
In the literature, we found articles that describe how technology can produce better warnings but there is little information about how to design and/or apply them. This is a problem because bad warnings, or warnings applied indiscriminately, can increase the occurrence of accidents, severe injuries, death and/or economic loss.
In this context, the idea of this project is to contribute to the design and implementation of effective technology-based warnings. To achieve this purpose, the strategy includes the adoption of Virtual Reality (VR) as a research tool, to generate and display the experimental contexts.
Virtual Reality is a field currently under development in Cognitive Sciences. However, its use in warnings research is uncommon and it is a factor of innovation. The advantages of VR, when compared with conventional methodologies, are manifested at different levels:
Possibility of overcome some methodological limitation such as ethical and safety issues;
Provide experimental scenarios that are interactive and quasi-real, at low cost, where human behavior can manifest itself in all its amplitude, with a strict control of experimental variables;
Evaluate the safety information processing in all the pre-behavioral stages and also the consonant behavior.
This last measure is a great improvement over subjective ratings, or at least an important complement to such measures.
The specific goal of this project is to compare the effectivene. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (1)  / Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: Elisangela Brito Pessoa Vilar - Integrante / Ernesto Vilar Filgueiras - Integrante / Francisco dos Santos Rebelo - Coordenador / Emilia Duarte - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 8
2007 - 2010
Using Virtual Reality to evaluate the safety information effectiveness
Descrição: This project is centered in the scope of Ergonomic Design, particularly in the subject of safety information evaluation, associated to the use of several channels and support of the communication about the existence of danger(s) and about the correct behavior to adopt. The warnings should be considered as the last option inside a safety strategy.
Safety warnings are important because they can avoid accidents, injuries, material damages and financial losses of productive systems but its importance is related to its capacity to influence the human behavior. To modify the behavior, a warning should be capable to overcome the several stages and obstacles inherent to the Communication and Human Information Processing Model (C-HIP model). In other words, the warning should be easily detected, read, understood and memorized. Its message should be coherent with the user's attitudes and believes. It should transmit the correct notion of risk level and make it clear that the benefit is greater than the cost of compliance.
The warnings effectiveness has been evaluated by the determination of rates such as salience, legibility, understanding, retention and adequacy of the behavior's declared intentions. The evaluation of the warnings effectiveness is the problem that this project seeks to investigate.
Many studies have been manipulating variables, such as warnings design characteristics (e.g. color, shape, dimension, pictogram, text, etc.) in order to determine its influence on the effectiveness rates, or carrying out comprehension tests, with or without control of the participant's personal variables. However, few studies have been investigating the true impact that warnings have on Human behavior. The evaluation of the success, through the analysis of the effective behavior, is considered much more important than any other evaluation process because it will be useless if a warning is seen, read and understood but not considered by the user when he is deciding which a. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (1) Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: Elisangela Brito Pessoa Vilar - Integrante / Ernesto Vilar Filgueiras - Integrante / Francisco dos Santos Rebelo - Coordenador / Emilia Duarte - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 5