2021 - Atual
Management and Allocation of Edge Computing Resources for IoT-enabled Smart Applications
Descrição: Multi-access Edge Computing (MEC) has been recently proposed to support IoT-enabled smart applications. Traditional IoT applications rely on remote cloud servers for processing and analytics of data offloaded from IoT devices. This traditional architecture provides powerful resources for IoT applications; nevertheless, it disadvantageously incurs in high network overhead, costs, and energy consumption for tasks and data offload from IoT devices to remote cloud servers. Therefore, MEC is a new computing paradigm proposed to reduce the network overhead, cost, and energy consumption in IoT applications. MEC places computation, communication, and storage resources at the edge of IoT applications. Therefore, IoT devices offload tasks and data to edge nodes in their proximity, rather than to remote cloud servers. However, edge nodes have severe limitations in terms of resources, as compared to remote cloud data servers. Thus, edge computing resources must be shared efficiently to ensure the stringent quality of service (QoS) requirements of smart applications supported by them. Therefore, in this research project we undertake the daunting challenges for the proposal, design, and development of efficient, fault-tolerant, cost-effective algorithms and architectures for the resource management and allocation of MEC, under daunting conditions of massive deployment of IoT devices, devices capabilities, wireless communication link quality, data offloading costs, deterministic and stochastic multimedia data generation, and soft and hard deadline constrains. We will investigate, characterize, and model the stringent QoS requirements of current IoT verticals and envisioned IoT-enabled smart applications. We will also design and develop optimization algorithms for fair, efficient, and fault-tolerant management and allocation of edge devices? radio and computation resources. Moreover, we will further propose and design a novel architecture for fault-tolerant, load-balanced resource management in interconnected edge devices. The outcomes of this project will help improve the performance of MEC and IoT-enabled smart applications and services that are in high demand by Canadians and Canada ICT companies.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Rodolfo Wanderson Lima Coutinho - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Fonds de recherche du Québec - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2020 - Atual
Internet of Underwater Things: Developing Next Generation Large­Scale Autonomous Ocean Monitoring Systems
Descrição: The world is experiencing an era of climate change, increased oil exploration, and commercial ships and oil tankers travel on sea ice, exploration of natural resources on the Arctic, a rising of offshore fishing activities, growth of overseas transportation of goods, where ships carry approximately 95% of goods in North. Therefore, it is urgent the persistent, autonomous, real­time and large­scale data collection, monitoring, and surveillance of oceans towards the in­deep understanding of the critical roles they play, their sustainable exploration and protection, as well as the efficient information sharing for supporting marine traffic and improve safety navigation, and the effective response in case of emergencies and accidents in deep and iced sea. The worrying fact is that current technologies for data­sampling from oceans have severe limitations and are far from supporting the ever­growing demand for smart ocean applications.
This proposal is devoted to investigate, design and develop the foundations towards an innovative technology and autonomous infrastructure for underwater monitoring, which will supply the ever­growing demand for all sorts of underwater sensing and computation resources that will empower the next generation of large­scale, autonomous and real­time smart ocean applications. To do so, this program will address critical and fundamental challenges in terms of resource management and control, topology control, and content delivery in software­defined Internet of Underwater Things (SDN­IoUTs) for multimedia and time­critical­based smart ocean applications. The PI is responding to the growing demands of multimedia data from deep oceans and of autonomous technologies for supporting fast response in case of disasters and emergencies in deep and ice sea. The long­term vision of this research is towards the design of efficient protocols and architectures for multimedia content delivery in SDN­IoUTs.
Last, but not least, this program is expected to produce the knowledge and principles that will lead to the development of a new era in wireless networking and service provisioning systems for smart oceans­based applications, training HQP in areas with impressive growing demand by ICT and smart ocean and offshore Canadian companies, assist these Canadian industries to be the frontrunner of the technological advancements, and enhance Canada?s competitive position and goal of creating a world­leading marine safety system.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Rodolfo Wanderson Lima Coutinho - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2019 - Atual
Efficient Data Delivery for Pervasive Internet of Things
Descrição: This research project is aimed at investigating, modeling, designing, and developing energy-efficient, lightweight, distributed solutions for efficient content delivery in the next-generation of IoT/IoUTs-based pervasive computing applications. IoTs and IoUTs share fundamental challenges that diminish efficient data collection. First of all, low-power and resource-constrained devices are often employed. Moreover, missions for network maintenance and battery replacements are expensive and can threaten human life when the application is developed in inhospitable environments. Therefore, we shall develop energy-efficient networking protocols and architectures for data delivery in IoT/IoUTs applications and aimed at prolonging the IoT/IoUTs network lifetime. Second, access to the shared wireless medium for data transmission will be a challenge. This challenge is due to the massive number of devices (massive IoT) that will compete for the channel, which might lead to an increased delay for data transmission and diminish the performance of real-time applications. In IoUTs, the challenges for the wireless medium access is due to the low sound speed propagation, which lead the channel to be occupied by a long period of time in each transmission.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Rodolfo Wanderson Lima Coutinho - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Concordia University - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2014 - 2015
AR: Algoritmos de Roteamento para Redes Aquáticas
Projeto certificado pelo(a) coordenador(a) Luiz Filipe Menezes Vieira em 11/05/2015.
Descrição: O projeto consiste no desenvolvimento de algoritmos para as redes de sensores aquáticas, principalmente protocolos de roteamento geográficos para aplicações de monitoração, como plataformas de petróleo e hidrelétricas. O protocolo de roteamento é muito importante em redes de computadores porque elé é um algoritmo distribuído responsável pela escolha dos caminho que as mensagens devem seguir para chegarem ao destino final. Sem o correto funcionamento do protocolo de roteamento, não é possível entregar mensagens, interrompendo o serviço da rede. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Rodolfo Wanderson Lima Coutinho - Integrante / Luiz Filipe Menezes Vieira - Coordenador / Antonio Alfredo Ferreira Loureiro - Integrante / Marcos Augusto Menezes Vieira - Integrante / Alex Borges Vieira - Integrante / José Augusto Nacif - Integrante / Gustavo Pantuza - Integrante / Rafael Antonio - Integrante.
2013 - 2014
SENUREVE: Serviços na Nuvem para Redes Veiculares
Projeto certificado pelo(a) coordenador(a) Antonio Alfredo Ferreira Loureiro em 28/09/2014.
Descrição: Uma VANET (Vehicular Ad-hoc Network) é uma rede ad-hoc formada por veículos equipados com dispositivos de processamento, sensoriamento, comunicação sem fio e interfaces homem-máquina. Uma VANET será um grande passo para a construção de sistemas de transporte inteligentes. A computação em nuvem define um conjunto de recursos virtuais facilmente usáveis e acessíveis tais como hardware, plataformas de desenvolvimento e serviços. Estes recursos podem ser dinamicamente re-configurados para se ajustarem a uma carga variável, permitindo a otimização do uso dos recursos. O objetivo desta proposta é propor serviços de disseminação de informação para passageiros através de computação em nuvem. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (12) . Integrantes: Rodolfo Wanderson Lima Coutinho - Integrante / Antonio Alfredo Ferreira Loureiro - Coordenador.