2016 - 2019
Ractopamine: analytical method validation; and the detection in loin, tissues and urine of pigs fed meat and bone meal containing this additive
Descrição: Ractopamine hydrochloride (RAC) is a β-agonist additive that has been used in many countries as a repartitioning agent, redirecting nutrients in order to increase  leanness and decrease lipid deposition in pigs. Countries from the European Union and Asia question their safety, while American countries and Australia allow their controlled use as an additive added to the feed of pigsin the finishing phase. In Brazil, the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food Supply together with the national production sector, developed a Program called "SplitSystem" to ensure a safe product without RAC in order to meet international sanitary requirements. However, co-products used in animal feed may contain RAC, such as meat and bone meal (MBM), one of the main feed ingredients used in many countries which can partially replace soybean meal to lower costs. As the level of RAC in this protein source has not been established an experiment was under taken to examine the impact on pig tissues of increasing amounts of meat and bone meal (MBM) in four dietary groups: 0, 7, 14 and 21%  w/w of MBM-containing RAC (53.5 µg kg-1)  in the diet. The purpose was to verify if ractopamine residues remain in pig tissues (muscle, liver, kidneys, and lungs) and how much is eliminated through urine. To addrress these concerns, gilts were fed RAC via MBM daily, from weaning until slaughter. RAC was determined in muscle, liver, kidneys, and lungs with a limit of detection (LOD) = 0.15, 0.5, 0.5 and 1.0 µg kg-1, respectively), and no RAC residues were quantified above the limit of quantification (LOQ) = 0.5, 2.5, 2.5 and 2.5 µg kg-1, respectively). In urine, RAC concentration remained below 1.35 µg L-1. These values are below the maximum residue limits (MRLs) established by legislation. Therefore, MBM (53.5 μg kg-1 of RAC) can be used up to 21% in pig diets, however when considering restrictive markets, it is recommended not to use MBM.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: Carolina Naves Aroeira - Integrante / Carmen J. Contreras-Castillo - Integrante / Vivian Feddern - Coordenador / Vanessa Gressler - Integrante / DAGUER, HEITOR - Integrante / Luciano Molognoni - Integrante / Osmar Antônio Dalla Costa - Integrante / Gustavo J. M. M. de Lima - Integrante / Heitor Daguer - Integrante.
2012 - 2014
Efeito do congelamento prévio à maturação na maciez e cor da carne de tourinhos Nelore e Aberdeen Angus
Projeto certificado pelo(a) coordenador(a) Eduardo Mendes Ramos em 22/02/2018.
Descrição: Objetivou-se neste trabalho avaliar o efeito do congelamento prévio à maturação sobre a maciez e coloração da carne de bovinos das raças Nelore e Aberdeen Angus. Amostras do músculo Longissimus thoracis foram submetidas a dois tratamentos: maturação convencional e congelamento (-20 °C por 40 dias) seguido do descongelamento e períodos de maturação. As carnes foram avaliadas após 0, 7, 14 e 21 dias de maturação (1 °C), com a finalidade de determinar os parâmetros relacionados à maciez e coloração.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (1) . Integrantes: Carolina Naves Aroeira - Integrante / Eduardo Mendes Ramos - Coordenador / Alcinéia Lemos de Souza Ramos - Integrante / Paulo Rogério Fontes - Integrante / Márcio Machado Ladeira - Integrante / Lúcio Alberto de Miranda Gomide - Integrante.