2020 - 2022
Escalabilidade de Serviços Orientados a Interesse sobre MECs para Redes 5G
Descrição: A presente investigação busca produzir novos produtos/técnicas no contexto de sistemas 5G, especificamente utilizando ambientes MECs (Multi-Access Edge Computing) e o protocolo de redes orientadas a interresse RadNet. O desenvolvimento deste projeto se dará atrevés da utilização de tecnologias de Video-on-Demand (VoD), averiguar mecanismos para implementação de fluxos de comunicação um-para-muitos, usando protocolo de comunicação orientado a Interesse. Os requisitos ditos mecanismos devem ser aderentes aos suportes oferecidos pelas redes definidas por software (software defined-networks - SDN) e especificações para ambientes comunicação móvel de 5ª Geração (5G), usando recursos computacionais na borda da rede móvel (MECs).. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Diego Leonel Cadette Dutra - Coordenador / Mariana Dabul Nazario - Integrante.
2020 - 2022
6Genesis Flagship
Descrição: 1. Support industry in finalization of 5G. Companies worldwide will need considerable support in identifying new business opportunities, obtaining maximum benefit from state of the art technology and building knowledge-based capital for the radically renewed 5G operational environment. Flagship will carry out technology and system pilots for selected verticals by co-creating with companies and ensure timely relevant wireless expertise availability for industry needs and to enable economic growth via early adaption of critical smart society technologies.
2. Develop the fundamental technology needed to enable 6G. Fundamental research is 10-15 years ahead of industrial standards. The high scientific quality and usability of the theoretical research and concept development by Flagship researchers will be validated with separate functional components as well as early industry prototypes.
3. Speed up digitalization in society. Digitalization via 5G is strongly driven through the key verticals. The Flagship promotes development of vertical applications and services in a full-stack model including connectivity, services, content, end-user community and appropriate devices. The Flagship increases the impact of the 5G-driven society in building expertise around critical verticals and in developing those ecosystems further, both in co-operation with the existing ecosystems and by promoting new forms.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Diego Leonel Cadette Dutra - Integrante / Tarik Taleb - Coordenador.
2019 - 2022
MonB5G
Descrição: The MonB5G main goal is to provide a new model for the management and orchestration of high numbers of parallel network slices as envisioned in 5G and beyond. To achieve this goal, MonB5G focuses primarily on defining highly distributed management and orchestration system for network slicing and leveraging novel distributed data-driven mechanisms to realize zero-touch network and service management.
 MOSA!C lab Role: Participant in the network slicing management and orchestration system architecture definition (WP2); AI-driven management algorithms design, implementation, and evaluation (WP4 and WP5); and proof-of-concept development (WP6). Leading the definition of the framework and AI-driven mechanisms for providing security support to the network slicing management and orchestration system.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Diego Leonel Cadette Dutra - Integrante / Miloud Bagaa - Integrante / Tarik Taleb - Coordenador.
2019 - 2022
ACCORDION
Descrição: The ACCORDION project aspires for enhancing the service scalability by enlarging the edge resource and infrastructure pool to cover more geographies and users and meet the expected 5G requirements. ACCORDION will achieve its design goal by leveraging the available resources at a private cloud, Multi-Access Edge Computing (MEC), as well as end-devices, leaving the public cloud as a last resort. ACCORDION will also offer a ubiquitous and collaborative system that will address the needs and expectations of the next-generation application developers and infrastructure owners by offering a system that encompasses frameworks for next-generation application development, the establishment of an adaptive and robust cloud/edge infrastructure continuum, and the abstraction of widely heterogeneous pools. The ACCORDION project consists of three main layers that are on cascade one on top the other starting from the underlying edge infrastructure pool named Edge Infrastructure Pool Framework. The latter will help for creating a viable federation of edge and cloud resource and infrastructure owners. The second layer, dubbed edge/cloud continuum management framework, that offers different tools for achieving an intelligent interplay between edge and cloud resources, primarily aiming at the former and using the latter in the last resort basis as a ?capacitor?. Finally, the last layer is application management framework that supports the development of next-generation ?liquid? applications, formed from software that casually and effortlessly follows users as they use different types of computing devices by migrating computation, code and state flexibility between the devices.
 MOSA!C lab Role: Leader of T4.2, AI-based network orchestration, whereby the goal is to design and develop multi-domain AI-based orchestration framework that ensues the reliability and latency and gives the possibility for each slice tenant to define the blueprints for their VR/AR ready slices. It also leverages machine learning techniques for enabling efficient slice life-cycle management, self-configuration and self-optimization capabilities . Moreover, Mosaic Lab is leader of T5.3, DevOps to orchestrate network paths at the edge, that aims to explore efficient mechanisms for efficiently spotting network problems and orchestrating the network paths at the edge to mitigate the detected problems.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Diego Leonel Cadette Dutra - Integrante / Miloud Bagaa - Integrante / Tarik Taleb - Coordenador.
2017 - 2022
ACADEMY OF FINLAND - CSN
Descrição: CSN aims to introduce an innovative multi-domain network slicing architecture, along with supporting algorithms and mechanisms, to sustain both mobile network and service customization at different granularities (i.e., per vertical, per service and, when required, per individual user). The key objective is to provide programmability and scalable resource orchestration to facilitate a flexible, optimal and customized instantiation and life-cycle management of vertical segment services via the means of network slicing combing resources across different administrative domains. To always ensure short latency, the mobility of both the mobile services and the customized mobile networks will be seamlessly enabled as per the mobility features of users.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Diego Leonel Cadette Dutra - Integrante / Miloud Bagaa - Integrante / Tarik Taleb - Coordenador.
2017 - 2019
ANASTACIA
Descrição: Advanced Networked Agents for Security and Trust Assessment in CPS/IoT Architectures.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Diego Leonel Cadette Dutra - Integrante / Miloud Bagaa - Integrante / Tarik Taleb - Coordenador.
2017 - 2019
MATILDA
Descrição: A Holistic, Innovation Framework for the Design, Development and Orchestration of 5G-Ready Applications and Network Services over Sliced Programmable Infrastructure. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Diego Leonel Cadette Dutra - Integrante / Miloud Bagaa - Integrante / Tarik Taleb - Coordenador.
2016 - 2019
5G!Pagoda
Descrição: Federating Japanese and European 5G Testbeds to Explore Relevant Standards and Align Views on 5G Mobile Network Infrastructure Supporting Dynamic Creation and Management of Network Slices for Different Mobile Services. Project Coordinator.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Diego Leonel Cadette Dutra - Integrante / Miloud Bagaa - Integrante / Tarik Taleb - Coordenador.
2010 - 2015
Redes de Sensores sem Fio, Virtualização, P2P e DHTs para Aplicações Científicas, Redes Sociais, Telemedicina e Agricultura de Precisão
Projeto certificado pelo(a) coordenador(a) Claudio Luis de Amorim em 10/03/2016.
Descrição: Pesquisa e desenvolvimento de plataformas computacionais avançadas para diversas classes de aplicações distribuídas, nas áreas Científicas e da Engenharia, assim como novas e importantes áreas tais como distribuição escalável de mídias contínuas (vídeos e audio), redes sociais participativas, telemedicina e agricultura de precisão. As referidas plataformas serão baseadas em técnicas e mecanismos, incluindo máquinas virtuais, tabelas hash distribuídas, modelo distribuído P2P e redes ad-hocs.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Diego Leonel Cadette Dutra - Integrante / Claudio Luis de Amorim - Coordenador.
2008 - 2011
Servidores Escaláveis para Aplicações WEB e Científicas
Descrição: Otimizar técnicas e mecanismos escaláveis para diversas classes de servidores multimídia, de comércio eletrônico e aplicações científicas de grande escala.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Diego Leonel Cadette Dutra - Integrante / Claudio Luis de Amorim - Coordenador.
2007 - 2007
Serviços WEB Escaláveis (WEBE)
Descrição: O foco principal do projeto WEBE é desenvolver técnicas e mecanismos escaláveis para a construção de novos servidores WEB baseados em clusters que sejam custo-efetivos, confiáveis e portáveis para várias classes importantes de serviços WEB, com destaque para: a) aplicações científicas e de engenharia; b) vídeo sob demanda, incluindo suporte à mobilidade em redes sem fio; e c) comércio eletrônico..
Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (9) Doutorado: (4) . Integrantes: Diego Leonel Cadette Dutra - Integrante / Claudio Luis de Amorim - Coordenador / Sérgio Kostin - Integrante / Lauro Luis Armondi Whately - Integrante / Marcelo Lobosco - Integrante / Leonardo Bidese de Pinho - Integrante.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro / Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Bolsa.Número de produções C, T & A: 1