2018 - Atual
Bootstrap conditions for interaction-based multimodal learning in cognitive robotics
Descrição: With recent technological advances in computing and robotics, as well as new discoveries in the area of neuroscience, we are now more capable than ever before to attempt at simulating human life in a robotic environment. But it is very important to remember that the construction and design of a humanoid robot is not limited to the mechanical or to the sensors the robot possesses. One of the key pieces of this goal is the "brain" of the robot. How to program a robot so that it can process and emulate emotions, as well as learn from its surroundings is a very difficult task. In order to solve this problem, and bring us a bit closer to creating a "perfect humanoid", we will take affective neuroscience and recent developments in affective computing into strong consideration. We aim to design an emotional model based on inputs processed by an emotional module and expected behavior (output). On top of that, integrate the emotional module into the proposed cognitive architecture. In sum, the project's goal is to observe and quantify the influence of the expression of a robots motivational state, through emotions, when considering a robot's initial training (or learning) phase.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (4) . Integrantes: Paula Dornhofer Paro Costa - Integrante / Eric Rohmer - Coordenador / Ricardo Ribeiro Gudwin - Integrante / Esther Luna Colombini - Integrante / Alexandre da Silva Simões - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo - Bolsa.
2017 - Atual
Human health and adaptation to climate change in Brazil: a data science approach
Descrição: Climatic change and extreme events can interfere with the health, well-being and outcome of diseases in humans. Thus, this proposal aims to determine if and how climate change affect health parameters in the city of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil, with a special focus on the effects of extreme climatic conditions and their relationship with disease states. We will evaluate the results of clinical and laboratory exams and epidemiological data from population samples from public health services and also epidemiological data available in the Information System of the Unified Health System. To this end, we propose the use of the Data Science approach to confront changes in clinical variables and also to be able to propose climate models associated with the unfavorable results expected for health. We anticipate that the main contributions of this study will be: a) Provide adequate unification, storage and access to existing databases currently disseminated in different centers; b) Advance current regional knowledge regarding the impacts of climate change on the morbidity and mortality of cardiovascular, respiratory, hematological and oncologic diseases; c) Present predictive climate models capable of indicating current and future preventive health measures; d) Promote the insertion of public health guidelines in the application of mitigation policies, through clear warnings that accelerate governmental decision-making processes; e) Provide specific visualization tools for climate and health events, favoring new local and regional studies in Brazil and to understand pathophysiological and adaptive mechanisms to climate stress.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (7)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (3) . Integrantes: Paula Dornhofer Paro Costa - Integrante / Eliana Cotta de Faria - Coordenador / Ana Maria Heuminski de Avila - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo - Bolsa.Número de produções C, T & A: 3