2019 - Atual
Prevalência e fatores prognósticos da dor musculoesquelética incapacitante em crianças e adolescentes na cidade de São Paulo
Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (1)  / Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: Tiê Parma Yamato - Coordenador / Leonardo Oliveira Pena Costa - Integrante / Chris G Maher - Integrante / Steve Kamper - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2018 - Atual
Exercise, physical activity and education for children and adolescents with chronic musculoskeletal non-cancer pain
Descrição: This is a Cochrane review that has been started and the title has been approved by the PAPAS group.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Tiê Parma Yamato - Coordenador / Steve Kamper - Integrante / Zoe Michaleff - Integrante / Christopher Williams - Integrante / Emma Fisher - Integrante / Neil O'Connell - Integrante.
2017 - Atual
Explaining Pain for Kids: the best approach
Descrição: Musculoskeletal pain is responsible for a significant burden, even in children and adolescents. Children and adolescents who experience musculoskeletal pain are also those more likely to be inactive, be obese and have poorer health, all of which track into adulthood. One potential approach for helping children and adolescents with pain engage in positive health behaviours is by integrating pain educational interventions with exiting healthy lifestyle programs. 
Explaining pain is a biopsychosocial educational intervention designed to increase understanding of pain biology, decrease catastrophising and improve pain-related outcomes. There is evidence that adults with chronic pain benefit from this approach, but it has not been adapted and tested in children and adolescents. 
Our long-term goal is to develop a resource based on the explaining pain concept for adolescents. To do this, it is essential to determine the best way to deliver this information. In this project we will conduct semi-structured interviews with parents to understand what is the best approach to explain pain for adolescents (>12 years-old) in terms of language (e.g., text, cartoon) and modes of delivery (e.g., book, video). 
This project will be conducted by linking the University of Newcastle (UoN) and the Hunter New England (HNE) Local Health District. We have ongoing projects on children and adolescents between these two institutions demonstrating an established link. These ongoing projects will benefit from the explaining pain resource. For example, the Go4Fun lifestyle program and the vaccination program for reducing pain and distress have a planned component of pain education that is under development. Thus, this pilot project is timely to the development of this resource and will strengthening future grant applications by our group.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Tiê Parma Yamato - Coordenador / Steve Kamper - Integrante / Christopher Williams - Integrante / Luke Wolfenden - Integrante / Lorimer Moseley - Integrante / Anna Palagyi - Integrante.Financiador(es): The University of Newcastle Australia - Auxílio
										financeiro.