2022 - Atual
The Educational Data Observatory Network
Descrição: Aligned with the principles of the South-South cooperation and the United Nations Sustainable Development goals in education, this project aims to create The EducatioNal Data Observatory Network (TENDON) --- a participatory, co-creative and demand-driven network formed by multidisciplinary researchers, educational leaders and other educational stakeholders --- to strengthen the relations among south-south countries; establish a research group with a south-south focus to leverage high-quality education; expose students and academic staff to diverse views and focused research on the realities faced by the southern region; bring awareness of common problems at all educational levels via evidence-based approaches; share data, experiences and resources following the FAIR principles; monitor and set educational indicators that meet the needs and diversity of southern countries through live data dashboards; and, support the creation of educational policies to ensure access to quality, inclusive, and equitable education. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Coordenador / Sean Wolfgand Matsui Siqueira - Integrante / Ruben Manrique - Integrante.
2019 - 2020
Enhancing student second language speech perception
Descrição: Australian National University College of Arts and Social Sciences Teaching and Learning Fellowship 2019 (AUS$10,000). Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Terhi Nurmikko-Fuller - Integrante / Solene Inceoglu - Coordenador / Ben Swift - Integrante.
2019 - Atual
Searching as Learning: the search for information as a tool for learning
Projeto certificado pelo(a) coordenador(a) Sean Wolfgand Matsui Siqueira em 16/08/2021.
Descrição: Search tools are widely used to support formal and informal learning, but they do not consider didactic-pedagogical theories and approaches in their conception and evaluation. Thus, Searching as Learning emerges as an emerging area of ​​research that is based on the evolution of search engines when contemplating teaching-learning characteristics. This opens up a great opportunity for the Educational Technologies area, which can bring the necessary theoretical foundation for a new generation of search tools and experience in the use of technologies to support Education. The potential for technological research and innovation is broadly addressed in this project by (i) proposing a formalization of the concepts necessary for Searching as Learning (including how educational theories and approaches can relate to the concepts of information retrieval); (ii) analyze the exploratory search process and how the activities of this process impact user learning; (iii) design and intervene in search systems, rethinking them with a tool to support learning; and (iv) evaluating the exploratory search process and learning outcomes that occur during a search.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2)  / Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Sean Wolfgand Matsui Siqueira - Coordenador / PEREIRA, CRYSTIAM KELLE - Integrante / Teixeira, Cleber Pinelli - Integrante / Tibau, Marcelo - Integrante.
2016 - 2019
Integrating Pedagogical Practices and Educational Data Analysis Methods and Tools
Projeto certificado pelo(a) coordenador(a) Sean Wolfgand Matsui Siqueira em 09/07/2017.
Descrição: Several aspects can influence the teaching-learning process, such as teacher-student empathy, the perception of the importance of the content for the formation/life of the learner, the feeling of being part of a group, among others. Therefore, understanding the educational context is essential to adapt didactic-pedagogical practices to construct knowledge and skills better. To understand what happens in educational activities, methods and tools for analyzing educational data are currently being observed. However, there are various methods and tools, which are difficult for teachers or non-specialists to use. Thus, in this project, an environment that integrates pedagogical practices with educational data analysis methods and tools is proposed. The proposed solution is based on a set of models (analytical requirements model and pedagogical practices, and integrative model of analytical tools), tools integration architecture, and a calibration approach of the tools and methods for analysing educational data. It is expected that the development of educational technology proposed here will promote the dissemination of evidence-based education and allow the analysis of educational data to be effectively applied by teachers and other non-technical users, according to their educational contexts.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (2) Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Sean Wolfgand Matsui Siqueira - Coordenador / Maria Helena Lima Baptista Braz - Integrante / Leila Cristina Vasconcelos de Andrade - Integrante.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Bolsa.
2014 - 2017
Recommendation Techniques for Interlinked Data
Descrição: The number of individuals and organizations making publicly available data is significant, including large companies, newspapers, public agencies, research initiatives in various fields, etc. The consumption of this data can aid decision-making, contributing to the definition of new business alternatives and accelerating scientific progress.
In this context, challenges arise related to how to discover, access and integrate data from different sources. The Web is an ideal medium to enable this process given its ubiquity, distributed, scalable nature and maturity. In this way, a set of principles and technologies, known as Linked Data, were created that leverage the Web infrastructure to enable the sharing and reuse of data on a massive scale (Heath and Bizer 2011).
This project will investigate solutions to three fundamental problems: (1) How to recommend ontologies for describing interlinked datasets? (2) How to recommend datasets for an efficient interlinking generation? (3) How to create and keep links between datasets up to date? To test the techniques created, the project will also explore the development of applications to validate and evaluate research results.
In addition, the project will enable even greater interaction between researchers from the Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio), Fluminense Federal University (UFF) and Federal University of Ceará (UFC).. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (1) Doutorado: (5) . Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Marco Antonio Casanova - Integrante / Giseli Rabello Lopes - Coordenador / Leme, Luiz André P. Paes - Integrante / Vânia Maria Ponte Vidal - Integrante.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2014 - 2015
LinkedUp Challenge International Competition: Text Simplifier for Different Contexts and Learning Levels
Descrição: This project aimed to develop a text simplifier tool for an international competition on educational tools using linked data technologies.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (3) . Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Gilda Helena Bernardino de Campos - Coordenador.
2014 - 2015
Recommending and Matching Large Datasets on Linked Data (Microsoft Azure for Research Award Program)
Descrição: The Linked Open Data initiative promotes the publication of interlinked datasets, thereby creating a global scale data space. However, due to the lack of tools to identify related datasets, the process of dataset interlinking is hindered and new datasets are often interlinked to hub datasets, such as DBpedia or Freebase. Thus, to allow the creation of a global space, techniques to recommend datasets for interlinking and to support data integration task over concepts, properties and instances must be designed. This project proposes innovative techniques for the dataset interlinking recommendation and property alignment process over large ontologies adopted by the datasets. Moreover, the project includes large-scale experiments to evaluate the proposed approaches. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Alexander Mera - Integrante / Giseli Rabello Lopes - Coordenador / Casanova, Marco Antônio - Integrante / José Herrera - Integrante.
2014 - Atual
Web of Data: Fundamentals, Techniques and Applications
Projeto certificado pelo(a) coordenador(a) Marco Antonio Casanova em 07/01/2015.
Descrição: Applications developed for the web, from simple visualizations to sophisticated interactive tools, make accessing data considerably easier. However, such applications process data in different volumes, in different formats and from different sources. The W3C Data Activity: Building the Web of Data was created to address the problems generated by this diversity and therefore potentially facilitate the integration and processing of data published on the Web. This initiative develops recommendations, formats, models and tools for exchanging data. However, publishing and accessing data in accordance with the precepts of the Web of Data poses challenges. The overall objective of this project is to investigate the fundamentals, create techniques and develop experimental applications to make publishing and accessing data on the Web as simple as publishing and accessing Web pages today. This project will initially study the problem of ontology reuse in the design of RDF schemas. This problem will be addressed through the definition of structural decision procedures for expressive ontologies. Such procedures allow the definition of ontology algebras which, in turn, formalize the notion of vocabulary reuse and integrity constraints. The project will then address the issue of inconsistent data mashup. The second problem will be addressed through the definition of procedures for verifying models in Description Logics with Defaults. Techniques for building the Web of Data will address: discovering relationships between entities; the recommendation of ontologies for publishing databases; the recommendation of datasets to be linked; the maintenance of materialized interlinks between data sets; the maintenance of materialized data merges; the merging of hybrid data (static data and data strings). The expected results are new generation techniques for publishing databases and data strings on the Web of Data, offering more sophisticated functionality. The project will address the development of two classes of applications: inducing entity property values ​​and entity recommendation.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (8) Doutorado: (8) . Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Marco Antonio Casanova - Coordenador / Antonio Luz Furtado - Integrante / Luiz André P. Paes Leme - Integrante / Giseli Rabello Lopes - Integrante / José Antonio F. de Macedo - Integrante / Vânia Maria Ponte Vidal - Integrante / Fabio A.M. Porto - Integrante / Hélio Côrtes Vieira Lopes - Integrante.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2013 - 2017
Associa: Exploring a Semantic and Social Teaching-Learning Environment
Projeto certificado pelo(a) coordenador(a) Sean Wolfgand Matsui Siqueira em 09/07/2017.
Descrição: This project aims to define, specify, and develop a semantic and social teaching-learning environment through computational solutions to better use technologies to support the teaching/learning process. From this environment, explore the possible benefits (and problems) of this approach. It seeks to semantically describe the contents used in learning and the interactions between the participants and themselves. Through these descriptions, we intend to analyze how semantic associations can enable a more proactive and intelligent environment, adaptable to the characteristics of the participants. For this, it is also expected to use and develop the environment based on the formation and analysis of social networks resulting from interactions between participants to get to know the participants better. This is intended to allow the Brazilian citizen's participatory and universal access to knowledge, considering educational characteristics and contextual adaptation to the specificities of the participants. Several research questions are presented and will be studied in the project, such as the semantic structure itself, combined with social technologies in a teaching-learning environment, and adaptability based on theories and concepts from Education. This project is associated with the Brazilian Institute of Web Science (http://webscience.org.br). Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (4)  / Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Sean Wolfgand Matsui Siqueira - Coordenador / Maria Helena Lima Baptista Braz - Integrante / Geórgia Regina Rodrigues Gomes - Integrante / Edmar Welington Oliveira - Integrante / Leila Cristina Vasconcelos de Andrade - Integrante / Fernando Antonio Pinhati Júnior - Integrante / Thiago Baesso Procaci - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundação Carlos Chagas Filho de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do RJ - Bolsa.
2012 - 2014
Accessing the Web of Data
Projeto certificado pelo(a) coordenador(a) Marco Antonio Casanova em 30/06/2014.
Descrição: The Web of Data is composed of data published in a standardized format, using uniform identifiers, and interconnected with each other. The Web of Data provides a very simple way to describe data and to link separately published data. However, accessing the large datasets available on the Web of Data still poses several challenges. In fact, query processors created for the Web of Data are not yet able to efficiently process large volumes of data. The overall objective of the project is to develop methods, tools and experiments to make accessing the Web of Data as simple as accessing Web pages with the help of search engines.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Marco Antonio Casanova - Coordenador / Alexander Mera - Integrante / Karin Koogan Breitman - Integrante / Luiz André P. Paes Leme - Integrante / José Antonio F. de Macedo - Integrante / Vânia Maria Ponte Vidal - Integrante / Helena Piccinini - Integrante / Fabio A.M. Porto - Integrante / Ivanildo Barbosa - Integrante.
2012 - 2014
LinkedUp
Descrição: The LinkedUp Project is a FP7 Support Action which pushes forward the exploitation and adoption of public, open data available on the Web, in particular by educational organisations and institutions. LinkedUp provides a range of activities, including the establishment of the LinkedUp Challenge and a corresponding evaluation framework. These are aimed at identifying and promoting innovative success stories which exploit large-scale Web data in educational scenarios as part of robust applications and tools.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Dietze, Stefan - Coordenador / Nejdl, Wolfgang - Integrante / Besnik Fetahu - Integrante / Marenzi, Ivana - Integrante.
2012 - 2013
ARCOMEM
Descrição: ARCOMEM is a EU-funded research project. It is about memory institutions like archives, museums, and libraries in the age of the Social Web. Memory institutions are more important now than ever: as we face greater economic and environmental challenges we need our understanding of the past to help us navigate to a sustainable future. This is a core function of democracies, but this function faces stiff new challenges in face of the Social Web, and of the radical changes in information creation, communication and citizen involvement that currently characterise our information society (e.g., there are now more social network hits than Google searches). Social media are becoming more and more pervasive in all areas of life.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Dietze, Stefan - Coordenador / Nejdl, Wolfgang - Integrante.
2011 - 2013
Describing, Publishing, and Accessing Linked Data Sets
Descrição: The principles governing the creation of Linked Data provide subsidies for the publication and connection of data through the infrastructure provided by the Web. From the perspective of application development, they suggest a way to publish databases on the Web and facilitate the interoperability between databases. However, storing and accessing large sets of RDF triples, organized according to Linked Data principles, represents a major challenge. In fact, neither the RDF triples specialized repositories nor the SPARQL query processors scale to the desired data volume. New paradigms must then be investigated to make this scenario viable. Cloud computing presents itself as an option as it provides storage and processing power on a large scale and on-demand. The project's overall objective is to develop methods, tools, and experiments involving the description, publication, and access to Linked Data sets. Regarding the description of Linked Data sets, the project emphasizes the quality of the final set of RDF triples, measured both by the ease in identifying the semantics of the classes and properties included in the description of the set of RDF triples, via the integrity constraints of the application ontology, and the strategy adopted to generate the URIs that identify the resources described. In the context of publishing Linked Data sets, the project expands the traditional triplification strategy also to publish RDF triples in static web pages with embedded RDFa. It also explores the use of cloud computing platforms to store and access large RDF graphs, emphasizing indexing techniques. As for accessing Linked Data sets, the project explores methods for optimizing SPARQL queries in the context of exploratory processing and the context of mediated processing.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (5) Doutorado: (8) . Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Antonio Luz Furtado - Integrante / Karin Koogan Breitman - Integrante / Casanova, Marco Antônio - Coordenador / P. Paes Leme, Luiz André - Integrante / José Antonio F. de Macedo - Integrante / Vânia Maria Ponte Vidal - Integrante / Fabio A.M. Porto - Integrante / José Viterbo Filho - Integrante.
2010 - 2014
Data Sources Cooperatives
Descrição: This project aims to develop methods and tools for creating cooperatives of data sources, defined as sets of autonomous data sources, interconnected through mediators that offer data consultation and updating. A data source is a neutral term to designate a set of data encapsulated by a database management system or by an application specifically developed for that purpose. The proposed design methods for data source cooperatives will emphasize the definition of extensible standards for data organization and access, simplifying the creation of mediators. The proposed tools will include flexibilization mechanisms that replace the concept of exact answer with the concept of best effort answer. The proposed updating tools will also include mechanisms for flexible processing of workflows, rescuing the notion of transaction, as far as possible. The proposed methods and tools will maintain the freedom of data sources, inherent to the notion of cooperative.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (4) Doutorado: (5) . Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Marco Antonio Casanova - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Bolsa.
2009 - 2014
INCT - Web Science Institute
Descrição: The World Wide Web (hereafter simply called the Web) is having an increasing impact on research, technological development and society as a whole. How we communicate, collaborate, and learn are radically changing thanks to the Web. Surprisingly, it has been little researched as an object of study per se. This motivated the appearance, in 2006, of a new area of ​​research called Web Science. In this new domain, the Web itself is the object to be studied, therefore, it ceases to be considered as a mere technology based on computers, which serves as a basis for communication and interaction on a worldwide level. With this motivation, this project proposes the creation of the Brazilian Institute for Research in Web Science, which will integrate 10 Brazilian institutions joining efforts to understand and plan the Web. The Institute has the following missions: (a) To advance scientific research along associated lines to Science of the Web, in which researchers from the Production Institute produce quality contributions to the national and international scientific communities; (2) Educate professionals and researchers to ensure innovation and promote interdisciplinary collaboration; (3) Transfer knowledge to all sectors of society through comprehensive educational programs; and (4) Transfer knowledge to industry and the service sector through specific programs, including residencies at the Institute. The Institute's research program is organized into 5 layers: People and Society, Software Technologies for Web Applications, Web Data Management, Web Infrastructure, and Web Science Fundamentals. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Marco Antonio Casanova - Integrante / Carlos José Pereira de Lucena - Coordenador.
2006 - 2013
Quality in Distance Education: a longitudinal survey of teachers in federal government training programs
Descrição: The objective of the research is to find out how the teachers of the Technologies in Education specialization course perceive what quality is in distance learning courses. Quality will be defined from indicators collected in the literature and will address the following factors, among others: pedagogical mediation, usability, didactic design, virtual learning environment, didactic material, contents, pedagogical architectures, etc. In addition, the research will verify the teachers' perception of the public policies that support educational actions in distance education.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Gilda Helena Bernardino de Campos - Coordenador / Cílio Ziviani - Integrante / Gianna Oliveira Roque - Integrante / Pedrosa, Stella - Integrante.
2006 - 2011
Methods for monitoring and evaluating learning for web-mediated distance education
Descrição: This project aims to analyze and develop methods to assess student performance in large online courses in Brazil. This project results from the partnership with SEED-MEC/Education Ministry/Brazil and a course carried out by PUC-Rio, involving more than 10,000 students throughout Brazil.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Bernardo Pereira Nunes - Integrante / Igor Martins - Integrante / Gilda Helena Bernardino de Campos - Coordenador / Gianna Oliveira Roque - Integrante / Pedrosa, Stella - Integrante.