2011 - Atual
Grids em Aplicações da Indústria e da Administração Pública
Descrição: Descrição: Grids computacionais têm o potencial para revolucionar a computação de alto desempenho ao prover acesso ubíquo e sob demanda a serviços e recursos computacionais. Tais infraestruturas de computação distribuída visam permitir o acesso e composição sob demanda de serviços fornecidos por diversos provedores, possivelmente pertencentes a diferentes domínios administrativos, prometendo níveis de paralelismo sem igual para aplicações de alto desempenho. Este projeto de pesquisa visa a aplicação de Grids Computacionais para a resolução de problemas concretos da indústria e da administração pública, através da expansão do cluster computacional do CEFET/RJ e da sua integração com Grades Computacionais Internacionais. Especificamente nesse projeto busca-se aplicações para problemas de: (1) seqüenciamento de produção; (2) mix de produtos estocásticos; (3) redes massivas; e (4) mineração de processos administrativos, a partir do desenvolvimento de casos reais.. 
Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2) . Integrantes: Diego Moreira de Araujo Carvalho - Coordenador / Cristina Gomes de Souza - Integrante / GARCIA BARBASTEFANO, RAFAEL - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundação Carlos Chagas Filho de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do RJ - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2010 - 2012
Grid Initiatives for e-Science virtual communities in Europe and Latin America - IST-2011-261487
Descrição: GISELA aims at ensuring the long-term sustainability of the Latin American component of its e-Infrastructure. This translates into the following sub-objectives: * Establish a powerful e-Infrastructure facility built on the EELA-2 e-Infrastructure legacy * Work out and implement a sustainability model for the e-Infrastructure In parallel, the Project supports Virtual Research Communities, addressing both: Current EELA-2 small User Communities; Larger VRCs through Specialised Support Centres (SSCs).. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Diego Moreira de Araujo Carvalho - Coordenador / bernard marechal - Integrante.
2008 - 2010
E-science grid facility shared by Europe and Latin America - IST-2008-223797
Descrição: Four main objectives define the content of the EELA-2 Mission: 1. Build a powerful, functional and well supported Grid Facility by: Expanding the current e-Infrastructure to consist of 41 Resource Centres (13 in Europe and 28 in Latin America) mobilising about 3000 computing cores and more than 700 Terabytes of storage space, at start of the project and to further grow by 20 % in computing and 15 % in storage over the duration of the project; Providing the full set of Infrastructure and Application-oriented Grid Services needed by all types of applications in their scientific environment; Building the support of the e-Infrastructure to provide high reliability services to partnerships spanning the Atlantic Ocean by: Providing a complete set of Global Services from central EELA-2 Operation and Networking Support Centres (EOC/ENSC); Targeting the creation of Regional Operation Centres (ROC) in Latin America, covering one or more countries; Pursuing the aggressive EELA Training and Dissemination programme; Creating a comprehensive knowledge repository on Grid operation federated with the EGEE ones. Contributing to the implementation, operation and support of new Certification Authorities required in Latin America and to their coordination within the framework of TAGPMA. 2. Address a large community of users by: Selecting a wide portfolio of Applications: Against well defined criteria (including suitability for Grid deployment, easiness to be grid-enabled, grid added value, outreach/potential impact, computing resource contribution); Of various types e.g. from classical offline data processing up to control and data acquisition of scientific instruments, in several fields such as Life Sciences, High Energy Physics, Earth Sciences, etc.. With the expected outcome of: Getting Grid technology widely adopted in various scientific branches and promoting e-Sciences towards several publics (Scientific, Social, Industry).. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Diego Moreira de Araujo Carvalho - Coordenador / bernard marechal - Integrante.
2006 - 2008
E-infrastructure shared between Europe and Latin America - IST-2006-026409
Descrição: Several international projects and collaborations have emerged in the last years due to the increasing demand for grid distributed resources around the world. One important aspect of these initiatives deals with the "gridification" of computing intensive scientific applications otherwise difficult to run efficiently. The EELA Project (E-Infrastructure shared between Europe and Latin America) is a collaboration between Latin American and European institutions that has developed a potent e-infrastructure for e-Science applications. This paper describes the consolidated EELA e-infrastructure and the progress achieved so far. The EELA project is funded by the European Commission under the contract number IST-2006-026409. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Diego Moreira de Araujo Carvalho - Integrante / Felipe Maia Galvão França - Integrante / Ines Dutra - Integrante / pedro henrique rausch bello - Integrante / bernard marechal - Coordenador / Alexandre Duarte - Integrante / Claudio Cherubino - Integrante / Vanessa Hamar - Integrante / Luis Núñez - Integrante / Harold Castro - Integrante / Ciuffo, Leandro - Integrante / Hoeger, Herbert - Integrante / Barbera, Roberto - Integrante / G. Andronico - Integrante / E. Giorgio - Integrante / D. Scardaci - Integrante / Andronico, Giuseppe - Integrante / Ardizzone, Valeria - Integrante / Bruno, Riccardo - Integrante / GARCIA BARBASTEFANO, RAFAEL - Integrante.