2020 - Atual
sWords
Descrição: Algoritmo de redes semântico-temporais para realização de mineração de texto diacrônica com utilidade metacientífica e corporativa.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Oldimar Pontes Cardoso - Coordenador / DA COSTA, MARCO AURÉLIO - Integrante.
2018 - 2020
OpenHistory
Descrição: The main objective of this research project is to develop a Workflow Management System (WMS) at [openhistory.online] to tackle the decline of the scientific culture in the era of fake news by introducing scientific reproducibility into historical research and, at the same time, launch the use of this platform with a scientific experiment on the same phenomenon that it is being created to face off. This opening experiment is called ?The public uses of the word history.? Its historical sources are the full texts of six European/American newspapers from 2000 to 2019 and its specific goals are to understand the public uses of the word history in the last two decades and to explain, using its semantic-temporal networks, how the transformation of its social prestige relates to the decline of the scientific culture in the era of fake news. This WMS will allow every scientist to collaborate with other stakeholders, upload their data or use open data from other scientists, select open exclusion lists, open methods, open reports and open-access publications. The metahistorical algorithm inside this WMS has already been developed by this researcher and uses semantic-temporal networks to make diachronic confrontation of written sources. This WMS has science-society interface features to integrate scientific research, stakeholders? collaborations, scientific dissemination and scientific communication. The platform?s users will be classified into six categories and the available content will vary based on these user categories. All the training for the different user categories will be made inside the WMS by the platform EDU5, which was also developed and is owned by this researcher. The main expected outcome of this research project is the creation of an open science tool that is a model of scientific reproducibility in History, contributing to strengthen scientific rigor in this area and to face the replication crisis in science in general.. Situação: Desativado; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Oldimar Pontes Cardoso - Coordenador.
2016 - 2018
Conexão Aprendizagem
Descrição: Adaptive platforms break up with the concept of classroom, where teaching is done in the same way to everyone, pretending that the whole classroom is a single imaginary learner. Nevertheless, the most common procedure to establish an adaptive platform is to start the teaching in a traditional single way and to wait for the feedback of the algorithms created to understand the learning process. The proposal of the adaptive platform in this research is to start the "adaptation" at the beginning of the learning process and completely leave behind the teaching procedures related to the idea of "single imaginary learner" and the concepts of "classroom" and "schoolbook". With this new way of thinking, the adaptation does not depend exclusively on the long run analysis of the learning processes, but can also teach in different ways from the beginning. This is possible because learners are classified according to learning types developed under didactical knowledge. All the learning material inside this adaptive platform is created specifically to teach from 8 to 64 different learning types. The learners are classified in one of these learning types through a simple questionnaire filled when they sign up. During the whole interaction with the platform, this algorithm is able to reclassify the learning type of each learner according to their answers, and change the way of teaching accordingly. The difference among this platform and most of the other is the possibility to prospect educational data where we know they are, instead of just mine them in a complete unknown subsoil.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Oldimar Pontes Cardoso - Coordenador.
2009 - 2009
Populärhistorische Themen in argentinischen, brasilianischen, deutschen und französischen Schulbüchern
Descrição: Diese Forschung benutzt die Bibliothek des Georg-Eckert-Instituts, um zu erforschen, wie derselbe historische Themen in Schulbüchern verschiedener Länder unterschiedlich erzählt wird. Diese Arbeit wird auf sechs populärhistorische Themen begrenzt, die in den Schulbüchern von mehreren Ländern vorkommen : Antikes Griechenland, Römisches Reich, Inquisition, Französische Revolution, Weltkriege und Kaltkrieg. Diese Forschung wird sich auf Schulbücher von vier Länder konzentrieren : Argentinien, Brasilien, Deutschland und Frankreich.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Oldimar Pontes Cardoso - Integrante / Simone Lässig - Coordenador.
2008 - 2012
Concepções sobre função social da História em revistas de divulgação científica
Descrição: O objetivo desta pesquisa é analisar as diferentes concepções de função social da História nas revistas de divulgação científica dessa área no Brasil, na França e na Alemanha. As discussões sobre função social têm uma presença importante tanto na Teoria e Filosofia da História quanto nas intervenções públicas dos leigos sobre essa disciplina. Esta pesquisa analisará todas as edições dos últimos cinco anos de duas revistas selecionadas em cada um desses países. Serão analisadas as revistas brasileiras Revista de História e Superinteressante-Aventuras na História, as revistas francesas L?Histoire e Historia, e as revistas alemãs Damals e P.M. History. O critério de seleção dessas revistas foi contemplar, em cada país, uma revista de mediação científica ? Revista de História, L?Histoire e Damals ? e uma revista de grande público ? Superinteressante-Aventuras na História, Historia e P.M. History ?, para poder analisar as diferenças entre esses dois tipos de revista de divulgação científica.. Situação: Desativado; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Oldimar Pontes Cardoso - Integrante / Raquel Glezer - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo - Bolsa.
2008 - 2012
Populärwissenschaftliche Geschichtsmagazine in Brasilien und Deutschland: ein Vergleich der Konzeptionen und Studien zur Rezeption im Geschichtsunterricht
Descrição: Das Ziel dieser Forschung ist es, den Unterschied zwischen deutschen und brasilianischen populärwissenschaftlichen Magazinen für Geschichte und die verschiedenen Einsatzweisen durch deutsche und brasilianische Lehrer und Schüler zu analysieren. Zu diesem Zweck bedient sich diese Forschung der Methode der eingehenden Analyse von historischen Quellen und der Methode der Autokonfrontation im Sinne von Yves Clot, Daniel Faïta  und, in Deutschland, Clemens Knobloch, die es ermöglicht, die Veränderungen zu untersuchen, die während des Zeitraums der Interaktion mit dem Forscher in den Redebeiträgen und anderen Praktiken von Lehrern und Schülern stattgefunden haben. In Übereinstimmung mit dieser Methodologie werden sowohl in Augsburg, Deutschland, als auch in São Paulo, Brasilien, zu untersuchende Lehrer-Schüler-Gruppen gebildet. Jeder Lehrergruppe wird der Einsatz ausgewählter Artikel aus populärwissenschaftlichen Geschichtszeitschriften vorgeschlagen, und zwar den deutschen Lehrerrn aus den Zeitschriften Damals und P.M. History und den brasilianischen Lehrern aus den Zeitschriften Revista de História und Superinteresante ? Aventuras na História. Die vom Forscher in diesen Zeitschriften ausgewählten Themen stellen Inhalte in den Vordergrund, die sowohl in brasilianischen als auch in deutschen Schulen behandelt werden, damit verglichen werden kann, wie die Zeitschriften der beiden Länder die gleichen Themen behandeln, wie die Lehrer beider Länder sie unterrichten und wie die Schüler beider Länder sie verstehen. Die Form, in der diese Artikel im Klassenzimmer eingesetzt werden sollen, wird in jeder Gruppe gemeinsam diskutiert und geplant, um dann im Unterricht eines oder mehrerer Lehrer der Gruppe in die Praxis umgesetzt zu werden. Der Forscher beobachtet den Unterricht dieses oder dieser Lehrer, nimmt ihn auf Video auf  und bearbeitet anschließend die Videos, um sie mit der Lehrergruppe zu diskutieren. Außerdem bildet der Forscher eine Gruppe von Schülern aus den Klassen, d. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Oldimar Pontes Cardoso - Integrante / Susanne Popp - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Alexander-von-Humboldt Stiftung - Bolsa.