2023 - Atual
Consensus Cellular Automata Algorithms and Tie-Majority - CAMA (funded by CAPES STIC-AmSud 88881.694458/2022-01)
Descrição: [O projeto tem coordenação múltipla, um por país: M.M. Medel (Chile), P.P. Balbi (Brasil) e G. Theyssier (França).]
Given a set of binary opinions of individuals {0, 1} in a grid of one and two dimensions, we propose to develop procedures that lead to consensus states, that is, that all individuals have the same opinion (0* or 1*). For this purpose, we will work in the context of cellular automata, redefining rules (essentially, related with the majority function which select at each step the most represented state), neighborhoods and iteration modes that allow, at least partially, to reach consensus (convergence to the fixed points 0* or 1*). In two dimensions, by using the asynchronous update (i.e., a site is updated at each step) we will characterize neighborhoods and local functions such that consensus is reached. Furthermore, we will compare the quality of these processes according to the classical CA problem of density, by which a given binary initial condition is subjected to a local rule until reaching a consensus fixed point, a*, where a is the most represented state in the initial condition). Also, taking into account the two principles of the definition of a local majority function used for the previous developments (what to do in cases of a tie and what to do when there is a majority), reclassify ECAs  (the three-neighborhood, one-dimensional elementary cellular automata with next-nearest left and right neighbors) and extend the rules thus presented to two-dimensional grids, in order to study their computational complexity. Both problems, that of consensus and that of characterization, will be addressed both theoretically and through large-scale computational simulations.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (1)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (6) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador / Eric Goles - Integrante / Guillaume Theyssier - Integrante / MARCO A. S. MONTALVA MEDEL - Integrante / Kevin Perrot - Integrante / Pedro Montealegre - Integrante / Adrien Richard - Integrante / RUIVO, EURICO - Integrante / Sylvain SENÉ - Integrante / Martín Ríos Wilson - Integrante / Pierre Guillon - Integrante / Florian Bridoux - Integrante.Financiador(es): Agencia Nacional de Investigación y Desarrollo - Auxílio
										financeiro / Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Auxílio
										financeiro / Ministère de l'Europe et des Affaires Étrangères - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2023 - Atual
Distributed consensus with deterministic automata networks (funded by CNPq Bolsa PQ 303356/2022-7)
Descrição: An automata network is a set of finite state machines connected to each other according to some graph structure, with the individual state transitions defined by a function that acts on the states of the machine itself and those of the machines connected to it, that is, in its neighbourhood. Automata networks can be regarded both as fully discrete dynamical systems or unconventional models of computation, intertwined facets that play out together in defining their nature, most notably, their possibility of displaying arbitrarily complex global emergent behaviours, out of even simply defined local interactions; this feature is precisely what has allowed them consistent worldwide academic interest and support in novel applications in various real-world scenarios. So, the ability to better understand and control automata networks has more and more led to fundamental impacts in theoretical computer science as well as in computing technology (as happened recently, for example, and quite surprisingly, in blockchains). Cellular automata and Boolean networks are the most well-known instances of automata networks; while the units of the former are connected in a regular lattice, usually taking on arbitrary \emph{k}-ary states, the units of the latter are usually connected in arbitrary graph-like structures, taking on binary states. In this context, the objective of this project is to continue deepening current understanding on automata networks, specially their two previous well-established instances, by developing formal and computational methods in order to study their abilities and limitations, when their units are subjected to deterministic state update functions, be them synchronous or asynchronous. The project follows up and builds upon its (still ongoing) predecessor, but now with a stress on the recent notion of problem solving by \emph{distributed consensus}, meaning that its discrete solution is achieved when the network's units reach a global consensus, out of a completely distributed action of the units within their neighbourhoods.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (3) Doutorado: (5) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador.
2019 - 2023
Computation and dynamics of deterministic automata networks - CoDANet (funded by CAPES STIC-AmSud 88881.197456/2018-01 and CNPq Bolsa PQ 305199/2019-6)
Descrição: CoDANet is a CAPES funded STIC-AmSud project (no. 88881.197456/2018-01) that links automata theory, discrete dynamical systems and systems engineering, with the objective of deepening current understanding on computational and dynamical aspects of two types of objects, binary cellular automata and Boolean networks. As a methodological requirement, we will rely both on computational and mathematical methods, the former providing empirical data and understanding by means of simulations, and the latter framing the empirical observations into formal settings. In tune with that, we aim at developing mathematical and computational methods related to cellular automata and/or Boolean networks, in order to study their computational abilities and limitations, as well as the global dynamics entailed by the action of their local, deterministic state update functions, be them synchronous or asynchronous. More specifically, we can pinpoint the following:
-- Provide solutions to benchmark computation problems in the literature, under the possible formulations intrinsic to cellular automata and Boolean networks;
-- Better understand the conditions by which the various possible asynchronous updates can be advantageous over the synchronous schedule when performing a generic computation;
-- Analyse properties of the objects under study, with particular relevance to their computational abilities and dynamical behaviour; and
-- Characterise the limit behaviour of specific local functions or sets of them.
Equally important, in addition to the actual research outcomes, the project also aims at strengthening the academic ongoing connections among the partner institutions and fostering new ones, particularly those involving the participating students and young researchers.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (6) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador / Luiz Henrique Alves Monteiro - Integrante / Eric Goles - Integrante / Eurico Prospero Ruivo - Integrante / Kevin Perrot - Integrante / Fabiola Lobos - Integrante / Pedro Montealegre - Integrante / MONTALVA-MEDEL, MARCO - Integrante / Adrien Richard - Integrante.Financiador(es): Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique - Auxílio
										financeiro / Comisión Nacional de Investigacion Científica y Tecnológica - Auxílio
										financeiro / Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Auxílio
										financeiro / Ministère des Affaires Étrangères et du Développement International - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2019 - Atual
Classical and quantum automata networks (part of CAPES PrInt 88887.310281/2018-00)
Descrição: To explore the applicability of cellular automata, especially its quantum version, to the modelling of two-dimensional, graphene-like materials, and to deepen current understanding between properties and computational abilities of automata networks.
This is one of the research tracks within the project "2D materials and nanodevices to be applied to power, telecommunications and sensors", which is one of the four research programmes that make up U.P.Mackenzie's 5-year CAPES funded PrInt research internationalisation initiative, number 88887.310281/2018-00.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador / MARCO A. S. MONTALVA MEDEL - Integrante / Kevin Perrot - Integrante / Dario Andres Bahamon Ardilla - Integrante / Giuseppe Di Molfetta - Integrante / Pedro Contino da Silva Costa - Integrante.
2018 - Atual
Dinâmica de autômatos celulares assíncronos por prioridade de vizinhança (financiado pelo SINAPAD)
Descrição: Uso de esquemas de prioridades por vizinhança em redes de autômatos. Em um primeiro momento, procura-se explorar o universo dos autômatos celulares elementares assíncronos regidos por esquemas de prioridade por configuração de vizinhança. Posteriormente, procura-se caracterizar cada uma das regras sobre esse esquema de atualização, em particular verificando sua aplicabilidade em problemas de decisão conhecidos, como a classificação de densidade e paridade, bem como analisando suas propriedades, como a conservabilidade numérica de estados.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador / Eurico Prospero Ruivo - Integrante / Thiago de Mattos - Integrante.
2016 - 2018
Computations at the limit behaviour of cellular automata
Descrição: In spite of their extremely simple structure, cellular automata (CAs) can compute arbitrary functions, by means of a model of computation that is totally parallel, decentralised and, especially, local. The possibility of understanding how they compute and should be designed so as to perform a given computational task would be very relevant for information technology and computing theory. But understanding how these computations are carried out by individual CA rules, rule compositions over time, or spatial arrangement of different rules on the lattice, has been an enduring challenge. Key advances made related to design and analysis of CA rules have opened new perspectives towards understanding how specific CA-based computations are performed. Under the new lights these recent findings have shed, the goal of this project is to step forward, by deepening present understanding of the issues involved in classical computational tasks of the classification type, such as density and parity determination, and to analyse the limit configurations entailed by certain rules, both in terms of their spectral signature and their representation as a formal language. In doing so, we will endeavour to explore the possibility of relating computational and limit behaviour of rules. We have in mind addressing these issues not only in terms of individual CA rules, but also their temporal or spatial combinations.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (4) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador / Cláudio Luis De Meo Martins - Integrante / Fernando Faria - Integrante / Eric Goles - Integrante / Eurico Prospero Ruivo - Integrante / Maurício Verardo da Costa - Integrante / MARCO A. S. MONTALVA MEDEL - Integrante.
2014 - Atual
Templates for cellular automata
Descrição: Due to the very big number of cellular automata rules in any nontrivial space, finding a local rule that globally unfolds as desired remains a challenging task. This project aims at developing a data structure (a template) that allows for the representation of sets of cellular automata in a compact manner.
PS: The students numerically mentioned below have already finished their degrees.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador / Eurico Prospero Ruivo - Integrante.
2013 - 2016
Computação Natural: Modelagem Computacional de Sistemas Complexos Adaptativos e Aplicações (financiado pela CAPES)
Descrição: Subprojeto associado ao projeto do Núcleo de Estudos Interdisciplinares, obtido por um grupo de programas de pós-graduação da Universidade Presbiteriana Mackenzie, através do Edital 51/2012 da CAPES. O Núcleo é constituído pelo Laboratório de Interações Sociais e Humanas, e pelo Laboratório de Sistemas de Informação e Processamento de Dados e Imagens, este último mais especificamente relacionado ao subprojeto em questão. Trata-se de um laboratório com finalidade de abrigar estudos interdisciplinares voltados à compreensão e tratamento de dados e de imagens associados a fenômenos complexos subjacentes à interação informacional.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Integrante / Nizam Omar - Integrante / Maurício Marengoni - Integrante / Leandro Nunes de Castro Silva - Coordenador / Sandra Maria Dotto Stump - Integrante / Paulo Batista Lopes - Integrante.Financiador(es): Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2006 - 2016
Computing with Cellular Automata and their Temporal or Spatial Compositions (funded by FAPESP and MackPesquisa)
Descrição: Iniciado com financiamentos através de Projeto Regular FAPESP Proc. 2005/04696-3 (concluído em 04-2009) e Projeto MackPesquisa Edital 2007 (concluído em 01-2009), o projeto prossegue, na mesmo escopo original: "...The pathway to be followed combines evolutionary computation techniques, with enumerative searches in small regions of the search space, both processes guided by static information drawn from the state transition table of the cellular automata involved.
In tune of the latter, three related issues will also be investigated, related to the so-called elementary cellular automata - i.e., one-dimensional, with two states per cell, and such that the transition rule depends only upon the two next-nearest neighbours - namely, the limit behaviour of elementary rules, the outcome of combining their temporal evolutions, and the spatial combination of different rules in the same lattice. 
	All in all, the combined objective of this project is to make advances on the understanding and exploration of the computational ability of cellular automata (either through individual rules, or by their temporal or spatial combinations), as well as the development of effective ways to their design by means of enumerative and evolutionary computation techniques.
The project will revolve primarily around a selection of three problems, the density classification task, the recognition of hand-written decimal digits, and the parity problem, although others may also be considered, as the investigations progress and the research group associated with it develops.". Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (0)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (0)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo - Auxílio
										financeiro / Fundo Mackenzie de Pesquisa - Bolsa / Fundo Mackenzie de Pesquisa - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2005 - 2006
Advances in computing with cellular automata (funded by MackPesquisa)
Descrição: Regardless of more than four decades of cellular automata research, their use for computing functions at large is still at an embryonic stage. The main reason for this failure is the lack of a robust method for designing cellular automata of a predefined behaviour. Interesting cellular automata known in the field, and in virtually any field where they have been applied to, have all been found through  stepwise and thought-out engineering, by exhaustive searches in very restricted domains, by formal methods in extremely particular problems, and by specialised search methods, mostly evolutionary, in very specialised problems. Therefore, it is clear that there is the need for some more general and flexible design method, that might be useful across different problems and disciplines. Pursuing this target is the main aim of this project, using two-state cellular automata. The pathway to be followed combines evolutionary computation techniques, with enumerative searches in small regions of the search space, both processes guided by static information drawn from the state transition table of the cellular automata involved. This information gives rise to some parameters already available in the literature, but also to new ones, to be explored herein. In tune of the main target, another is investigating the limit behaviour of one-dimensional cellular automata rules and the outcome of combining their temporal evolutions, as this approach provides another way of performing computation by celular automata means. The project will revolve around a selection of three problems, the density classification task, the recognition of hand-written decimal digits, and the parity problem.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (0)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (4)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador / Fábio Tokio Miki - Integrante / José Carlos Bortot - Integrante / Carlos Cândido de Oliveira Jr - Integrante / Rogério Miranda Zanon - Integrante / Cláudio Luis De Meo Martins - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundo Mackenzie de Pesquisa - Auxílio
										financeiro / Fundo Mackenzie de Pesquisa - Bolsa.
2004 - 2005
Aplicações de algoritmos genéticos e autômatos celulares (financiado pelo MackPesquisa)
Descrição: Algoritmo Genético (AG) é uma técnica de otimização estocástica inspirada no processo evolutivo e na genética. Nesta técnica, parte-se de uma população inicial de soluções candidatas geradas aleatoriamente que são avaliadas de forma a se medir o quão próximas elas estão da solução do problema. Baseado nesta avaliação, um processo de seleção separa um sub-conjunto desta população para servir de base para a geração de uma nova população de soluções candidatas. Esta nova população é obtida a partir da aplicação de operadores genéticos sobre o sub-conjunto selecionado. Assim, o processo iterage. Ao longo das iterações, a população evolui até que se chegue em soluções satisfatórias. Em um projeto Mackpesquisa anterior, denominado Autômatos Celulares: Estudos Teóricos e Aplicações, a ênfase foi na aplicação dos AGs na busca de regras de transição de autômatos celulares capazes de executar tarefas especificadas. Autômatos Celulares (ACs) são estruturas computacionais de implementação extremamente simples, que se tornaram importantes ferramentas para o estudo e modelagem de sistemas complexos reais nas mais diversas áreas. Neste projeto, pretende-se dar continuidade a alguns tópicos relacionados a este problema. Além disso, outros tópicos que derivaram do estudo dos AGs e dos ACs no projeto anterior, como a aplicação dos AGs em Data Mining, serão explorados.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (0)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (3)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Integrante / Gina Maira Barbosa de Oliveira - Coordenador / José Carlos Bortot - Integrante / Carlos Cândido de Oliveira Jr - Integrante / Clay Rulliam dos Santos Miranda - Integrante / Marcelo Jorge Leão de Lima - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundo Mackenzie de Pesquisa - Auxílio
										financeiro / Fundo Mackenzie de Pesquisa - Bolsa.
2003 - 2009
Some cellular automata issues in the NKS approach (funded by Wolfram Research)
Descrição: Mathematica Academic Grant (Ref. 1149), provided by Wolfram Research.
The general motivation of this project is to address some cellular automata related issues, as they bear relevance to the NKS approach. More specificaly, the focus here is the computational ability of cellular automata, and the construction of simple applications with them, either as computing or dynamical systems. Along this line, the main research initiatives being carried out are: 1) To conceive a method for a better characterisation of the limit configurations of some periodic elementary cellular automata, in terms of the regular sets they represent, out of all random initial conditions; 2) To develop search techniques that would lead to one-dimensional cellular automata for solving, as perfectly as possible, the parity problem and the density classification task; 3) To derive analyses techniques of good rules in the previous tasks, that might lead to the best possible rules for the problems, as well as help explain the reasons for their good performance; 4) To evaluate the use of cellular automata as recognisers of simple patterns; and 5) To use cellular automata as dynamical system models. Additional related issues may also be tackled, as long as the advances in the previous topics suggest and/or the availability of human resources allow.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (3)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (13)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador / Fábio Tokio Miki - Integrante / Luiz Henrique Alves Monteiro - Integrante / José Antonio Poiani - Integrante / Victor Vladimirovich Trafaniuc - Integrante / Robson Bonancéa Vaiano - Integrante / Carlos Cândido de Oliveira Jr - Integrante / Rogério Miranda Zanon - Integrante / Cláudio Luis De Meo Martins - Integrante / Paulo Sérgio Germano da Silva - Integrante / Leopoldo Bulgarelli de Carvalho - Integrante / Fernando Faria - Integrante / Rubens de Almeida Zimbres - Integrante / Paulo Eduardo Florêncio - Integrante / Rogério Minoru Ywassa - Integrante / Guilherme Kronemberger - Integrante / Angelo Schranko de Oliveira - Integrante / Rodrigo da Silva Freitas - Integrante / Daniel Reimberg Miyamoto - Integrante.Financiador(es): Wolfram Research Inc - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2003 - 2004
Autômatos celulares: Estudos teóricos e aplicações (financiado pelo MackPesquisa)
Descrição: Os Autômatos Celulares (ACs) são exemplos de sistemas discretos (variáveis, tempo e espaço) que se tornaram ferramentas importantes no estudo de Sistemas Complexos. A exemplo de outros sistemas desta classe, os ACs exibem um comportamento dinâmico complexo e imprevisível. Um aspecto bastante estudado dos Autômatos Celulares diz respeito a como eles realizam computações. Os ACs computam através de processamentos locais e intrinsecamente paralelos que interagem entre si, emergindo um comportamento global e coordenado. Outro aspecto muito estudado é a previsão do comportamento dinâmico de um AC a partir de sua definição. Já foi provado que esta previsão é um problema indecidível e vários esquemas aproximados existem na literatura. Em um trabalho recente, um conjunto de parâmetros de previsão de comportamento dinâmico de Autômatos Celulares unidimensionais foi selecionado e  utilizado para auxiliar a busca evolutiva de Autômatos Celulares que executam tarefas computacionais específicas. Tais parâmetros foram utilizados como heurísticas embutidas na avaliação de um Algoritmo Genético utilizado como ferramenta de busca dos ACs. Os resultados encontrados mostraram que os parâmetros selecionados podem efetivamente auxiliar na programação de um AC. Neste projeto, propõe-se dar continuidade a esta linha de pesquisa, através da utilização de outros modelos de busca e da adaptação do ambiente para ACs bidimensionais. Além disso, serão abordadas aplicações de ACs em criptografia e epidemiologia e serão estudados aspectos teóricos dos ACs tais como a caracterização do seu comportamento dinâmico e o relacionamento com equações a derivadas parciais.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (5)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Integrante / Gina Maira Barbosa de Oliveira - Coordenador / José Carlos Bortot - Integrante / Luiz Henrique Alves Monteiro - Integrante / Clay Rulliam dos Santos Miranda - Integrante / Sandra Regina Cardoso Siqueira - Integrante / Aurélio Calegari - Integrante / Rogério Oliveira - Integrante / Oscar Uehara - Integrante / Marcelo Jorge Leão de Lima - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundo Mackenzie de Pesquisa - Auxílio
										financeiro / Fundo Mackenzie de Pesquisa - Bolsa.
1999 - 2000
CEVAL: Computação Evolutiva e Vida Artificial (financiado pelo CNPq)
Descrição: Projeto Temático em Ciência da Computação do CNPq (ProTem-CC, Edital 04/98), com verba do United Nations Development Program (PNUD-ONU). Os recursos foram obtidos na forma de infraestrutura computacional (1 estação de trabalho, 3 PCs, scanner e impressora laser) para o Grupo de Computação Evolutiva e Vida Artificial da UNIVAP, por mim coordenado.
O programa de pesquisa definido tem seu foco na disciplina de vida artificial; apesar de sua natureza interdisciplinar, é em alguns de seus aspectos computacionais que reside nosso interesse, principalmente a computação evolutiva e, em menor grau, os autômatos celulares. Também de interesse no projeto são sistemas complexos com arquitetura multi-agente do tipo enxame, grosso modo, uma generalização dos autômatos celulares, já que as entidades básicas do sistema têm a capacidade adicional de se mover. A ênfase das atividades do programa nessa linha são os estudos de computabilidade, comportamento dinâmico e evolução de autômatos celulares, e de sistemas correlatos do tipo multi-agente. Enfatiza-se ainda no projeto o tema de computação evolutiva, especialmente sua aplicação na resolução de problemas inversos, isto é, aqueles caracterizados pela busca da causa de um conjunto de efeitos observados. O projeto está centrado no Grupo de Computação Evolutiva e Vida Artificial da UNIVAP, por mim coordenado, e conta com colaboradores do LAC-INPE, USP, e Universidade de Sussex (Inglaterra), além de alunos de pós-graduação do INPE, ITA e UFSC.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (3)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador / Pedro Luis Kantek Garcia Navarro - Integrante / Fernando Manuel Ramos - Integrante / Haroldo Fraga de Campos Velho - Integrante / Philip Husbands - Integrante / Mário Gomes Godinho - Integrante / Stephan Stephany - Integrante / Gina Maira Barbosa de Oliveira - Integrante / Rubens Cruz Gatto - Integrante / Marcus Vinícius Pereira Pessôa - Integrante / Carmen Lúcia Ruybal dos Santos - Integrante.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 2
1997 - 2000
Iterative approaches to inverse problems with an emphasis on evolutionary algorithms (funded by FAPESP and British Council)
Descrição: Multi-institutional thematic research project, jointly funded by FAPESP (Thematic Research Grant No. 96/07200-8) and the British Council (Link Grant, Ref. SPA/881/126), mainly comprising the institutions: Inst. de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento, Univ. do Vale do Paraíba (UNIVAP); Lab. Associado de Computação e Matemática Aplicada, Inst. Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE); and Centre for Computational Neuroscience and Robotics, University of Sussex, England. Other institutions also participated, but with smaller roles.
The project will follow three research threads linked by the theme of their being related to new computational techniques in the context of  inverse problems. Our basic methodology relies on an optimisation framework to iteratively probe the solution space by solving a sequence of  direct problems until the optimal alternative is found; such na approach, called iterative, has the advantage of allowing a natural manner to deal with data uncertainty and data redundancy.
The three research threads to be pursued can be characterised as follows: the  use of evolutionary computation as a viable and generic problem-solving technique for iterative approaches to inverse problems; the application of classical (non-evolutionary) iterative methods associated with regularisation techniques (mostly entropy-based); and an exploratory thread which aims an evaluation of  the possible roles of neural networks in the context of inverse problems. 
Our focus is to follow them in a coordinated fashion, so as to explore their complementarity to solving six real-world inverse problems related to the National Institute for Space Research activities, and/or great economic relevance, selected from the areas of space dynamics, materials science, geophysics, heat transfer, oceanography, and meteorology. With knowledge obtained out of addressing these problems, we may be able to derive a generic methodology that would be important for addressing new inverse problems.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (7)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (6)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (6) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador / José Demísio Simões da Silva - Integrante / Pedro Luis Kantek Garcia Navarro - Integrante / Fernando Manuel Ramos - Integrante / Haroldo Fraga de Campos Velho - Integrante / Philip Husbands - Integrante / Stephan Stephany - Integrante / Alexandre Souto Martinez - Integrante / Inman Harvey - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo - Auxílio
										financeiro / The British Council - Auxílio
										financeiro / Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo - Bolsa.Número de produções C, T & A: 8
1997 - 1999
Computação evolutiva e autômatos celulares: Bio-informática em perspectiva de vida artificial (financiado pelo CNPq)
Descrição: Projeto individual de Produtividade em Pesquisa do CNPq (No. 300465/95-5), nível II-C.
Visa-se realizar pesquisa básica e aplicada em alguns aspectos computacionais ligados à área de vida artificial, especificamente, as técnicas de computação evolutiva e autômatos celulares. Os temas a serem abordados são: 1) Estudos de computabilidade, comportamento dinâmico e evolução de autômatos celulares, e de sistemas correlatos do tipo multi-agente; 2) Uso de técnicas de computação evolutiva, principalmente na resolução de problemas inversos; e 3) Avaliação de autômatos celulares como técnica para modelagem de crescimento de tecidos biológicos.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (0)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (0)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Bolsa.
1996 - 1996
Infraestrutura computacional para o LAC-INPE (financiado pelo CNPq ProTem-CC)
Descrição: Programa de Projetos Temáticos em Ciência da Computação do CNPq (ProTem-CC, Edital de Infraestutura de Pesquisa), com verba do United Nations Development Program (PNUD-ONU). 
O projeto visava a obtenção de infraestrutura computacional para o Laboratório Associado de Computação e Matemática Aplicada (LAC), do Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE), oferecendo como contrapartida a condução de pesquisa em suas várias áreas, e a condução de suas atividades de pós-graduação, em nível de mestrado e doutorado, no Programa em Computação Aplicada. O projeto foi contemplado com 12 estações de trabalho, 2 hubs, switch ethernet e impressora a laser.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (0)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (0)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Integrante / Horácio Hideki Yanasse - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro.
1995 - 1997
Dynamics of computable functions
Descrição: Projeto Individual de Pesquisa do CNPq (No. 300465/95-5), nível II-C. Durante 1997 o projeto foi conduzido na Universidade do Vale do Paraíba (UNIVAP), em função de minha mudança institucional. 
"The three aims of the research are: 1) To implement a cellular-automata-based computational system, that generalises the one I  developed during my doctoral programme; 2) To detail a particular set-up for the system within which it would be possible to approach the issue of emergence of computable functions in an effective way; and 3) To go about probing the emergence process by looking at issues of criticality phenomena that come about during the process.". Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (0)  / Especialização: (0)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (0)  / Mestrado profissional: (0)  / Doutorado: (0) . Integrantes: Pedro Paulo Balbi de Oliveira - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Bolsa.