2021 - Atual
PORVIR-5G
Descrição: The expected massive growth of mobile Internet traffic in 5G mobile networks introduces the need to change the operators? networks. Such networks require a drastic transformation towards open, scalable and elastic ecosystems supporting new types of communication. The PORVIR-5G project will develop and demonstrate a programmable fronthaul and backhaul integrating wireless with optical-packet networks and cloud solutions. It is intended to exploit virtual network splits that optimise resource allocation across the wireless, optical, packet, and compute/storage domains. Key enablers for PORVIR-5G are (i) Slicing over packet, wireless, and optical resources, controlled by (ii) deep programmability interfaces, where the devices are configured by network functions to provide the required performance for the future applications on the Internet. This programmability allows a more refined (iii) end-to-end and multilayer orchestration, considering the quality of experience of the users for each type of applications over the network. This project will validate and demonstrate the proposed programmability and virtualization capabilities in three demonstrations, each one of them enabling the key performance demands of 5G networks: an Internet of Things demonstrator focusing on massive machine-type communication; a smart city demonstration for reliable and ultra-low latency flows; and a high bandwidth video demonstrator showcasing the next-generation mobile broadband.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: João Paulo de Brito Gonçalves - Integrante / Everson Scherrer Borges - Integrante / Rodolfo Villaça - Integrante / Jose Marcos  Silva Nogueira - Coordenador / Christian Rodolfo Esteve Rothenberg - Integrante / Cristiano Bonato Both - Integrante / Daniel Fernandes Macedo - Integrante / Magnos Martinello - Integrante / Rafael Silva Guimaraes - Integrante.
2018 - Atual
Horizon 2020 -  ProTego
Descrição: Health care is an essential service that uses a great deal of sensitive personal data which has a high black market value being a lucrative target for data theft and ransomware attacks.The EU NIS Directive (EU 2016/1148) and GDPR (EU 2016/679) will harmonize and improve information security in Europe. Both require relevant ICT infrastructure operators to 
perform risk assessments, introduce appropriate security measures to manage identified risks, and report security breaches.  Unfortunately, risk-based approaches are notoriously difficult to implement in a consistent and comprehensive fashion. They  depend on a high level of understanding of both cybersecurity and of the system or network to be protected, are labour  intensive and costly and typically done by small teams. This is increasingly inappropriate as health care providers introduce  IoT systems, cloud services and (in the near future) 5G networks to provide services in which patients are more engaged, 
may own some of the devices used, and want access in hospitals, on the move or at home. The ProTego project will develop  a toolkit and guidelines to help health care systems users address cybersecurity risks in this new environment by introducing 3 main advances over current approaches: Extensive use of machine intelligence: a combination of machine inference  exploiting a priory knowledge for security-by-design, and machine learning from data for run-time threat detection and  diagnosis; Advanced data protection measures: advanced encryption techniques and hardware based full memory  encryption, and multi-stakeholder IAM to control access to and by user devices, to protect data at rest and provide ultrasecure data exchange portals; Innovative protocols for stakeholder education: using security-by-design analysis to target  training and support stakeholders to contribute to networok overall security.The toolkit will be integrated and validated in IoT  and BYOD-based case studies at two hospitals.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (1) . Integrantes: João Paulo de Brito Gonçalves - Integrante / Johann Marquez-Barja - Integrante / Maria PEREZ ORTEGA - Integrante / Luis Carrascal - Coordenador / DAVE SINGELEE - Integrante / Eliot Salant - Integrante / Esteban Municio - Integrante / Gamito-Gonzalez Antonio-Jesus - Integrante / Cilleruelo Rodríguez Carlos - Integrante / Junquera Sánchez Javier' - Integrante / Marcos Ortega Luis de' - Integrante / Hidalgo-Arriaga Ubaldo - Integrante / Gidon Gershinsky - Integrante / Michael Surridge - Integrante.
2009 - 2010
Comparação de desempenho de redes virtualizadas usando Virtual Box e VMWare Server
Descrição: Este trabalho analisa o desempenho de uma rede virtual utilizando dois virtualizadores diferentes, o Virtual Box e o VMWare Server. Este desempenho foi medido através de dois parâmetros básicos, que são atraso na entrega e perda de pacotes na transmissão, ambos medidos por softwares específicos instalados nas máquinas virtuais, como por exemplo, o Wireshark. Esta rede virtual teve uma série de serviços de redes usados para compartilhamento de arquivos e transferência de dados na rede sendo executados (NFS, FTP, SAMBA), gerando grande tráfego de dados durante sua execução. Uma análise comparativa consistente mostrando as diferenças de desempenho da mesma rede em virtualizadores diferentes foi criada e apresentada ao longo do artigo.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: João Paulo de Brito Gonçalves - Coordenador / FILIPE ERINGER GARRUTH - Integrante.