2010 - Atual
ASSERT: Advanced System and Software Engineering Research Technologies Lab
Descrição: The ASSERT Lab was created in August 2010 by professor Silvio Romero de Lemos Meira and his students. Meira's goal is to investigate and develop the state-of-the-art {practice} related to new way to programming the web. We define a notion of social machine and envisage an algebra that can describe networks of such. To start with, a social machine is ?A connectable and programmable building block that wraps (WI) an information processing system (IPS) and defines a set of required (RS) and provided services (PS), dynamically available under constraints (C) which are determined by, among other things, its relationships (Rel) with others?. These relationships can be used to describe the interactions between any number of machines in a multitude of ways, as a means to represent real machines interacting in the real web, such as Twitter, Twitter running on top of Amazon AWS, mashups built using Twitter and, obviously, other social machines. This work is not a theoretical work as yet; but, in more than one sense, we think we have found a way to describe web based information systems and are starting to work on what could be a practical way of dealing with the complexity of this emerging web of social machines that is all around us. For more information, please read http://scr.bi/bXZ46e. 
All research lines explored by the group are: Cloud Computing, Smart Cities, Social Machines, Software Architecture, Software Language Engineering and Software Product Lines.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (12) Doutorado: (6) . Integrantes: Leandro Marques do Nascimento - Integrante / Alexandre Alvaro - Integrante / Daniel Lucredio - Integrante / Frederico Araujo Durão - Integrante / Kiev Santos da Gama - Integrante / Rodrigo Elia Assad - Integrante / Silvio Romero de Lemos Meira - Integrante / Vinicius Cardoso Garcia - Coordenador / Bruno Falcão Leão Maia - Integrante / Carlo Marcelo Revoredo da Silva - Integrante / Dhiego Abrantes de Oliveira Martins - Integrante / Elaine Gleyce Mira de Figueiredo - Integrante / Francisco Airton Pereira da Silva - Integrante / Gustavo Henrique Rodrigues Pinto Tomas - Integrante / Jackson Raniel Florencio da Silva - Integrante / Jean Louis Brasil Fernandes da Costa - Integrante / Jose Fernando Santos de Carvalho - Integrante / Josino Rodrigues Neto - Integrante / Kellyton dos Santos Brito - Integrante / Marco André Santos Machado - Integrante / Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto - Integrante / Paulo Fernando Almeida Soares - Integrante / Ricardo Alexandre Afonso - Integrante / Ricardo Batista Rodrigues - Integrante / Saulo de Tarso Oliveira da Silva - Integrante / Thiago Pereira de Brito Vieira - Integrante / Vanilson Andre de Arruda Buregio - Integrante / Welington Manoel da Silva - Integrante / Wilton Oliveira Ferreira - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 8
2006 - 2008
Core Assets Development in Software Product Lines - Towards a Practical Approach for the Mobile Game Domain
Descrição: The most aimed objectives in software engineering are basically high
productivity, with high quality at low costs and one possible way for achieving
these objectives is establishing software reuse ? the process of creating software
systems from existing software rather than building them from scratch. In this
context, one approach that can enable software reuse in practice is Software
Product Line (SPL) ? a set of software-intensive systems sharing a common,
managed set of features that are developed from a common set of reusable core
assets in a prescribed way. A particular domain where the adoption of such
approach may bring relevant benefits is the mobile game domain mainly
because the games need to run in a big diversity of handsets and there is a big
number of games of the same type being developed with common features.
However, the characteristics of the mobile game domain usually create
barriers to apply SPL processes in practice, such as, restrictions of memory and
application size and different API implementations by different manufacturers.
In addition, the current SPL processes still lack of details on the phases related
to core assets implementation, making it difficult to properly handle the
mentioned characteristics of the domain in question.
Thus, this work aims at defining a practical approach for implementing
core assets in a SPL applied to the mobile game domain based on the good
practices from the state-of-the-art in the area. Moreover, in order to evaluate
the approach, an experimental study is performed using three platform-based
mobile games to build a SPL and, finally, a fourth game is derived from the SPL.
Keywords: software reuse, software product line, core assets
implementation, mobile game, experimental study.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (1) Doutorado: (2) . Integrantes: Leandro Marques do Nascimento - Coordenador / Silvio Romero Lemos Meira - Integrante / Eduardo Santana de Almeida - Integrante.Financiador(es): Centro de Estudos e Sistemas Avançados do Recife - Auxílio
										financeiro / Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 10
2005 - 2010
RiSE: Reuse in Software Engineering
Descrição: The Reuse in Software Engineering (RiSE) group was created in April 2004 by professor Silvio Romero de Lemos Meira and their students. RiSE's goal is to investigate and develop the state-of-the-art {practice} related to software reuse. Our major challenge is to develop a robust framework for software reuse. The proposed framework has two layers. The first layer is formed by best practices related to software reuse. Non-technical factors, such as education, training, incentives, and organizational management are considered. This layer constitutes a fundamental step before of the introduction of the framework in the organizations. The second layer is formed by important technical aspects related to software reuse, such as processes (reuse, reengineering, adaptation, component certification), environments, and tools (repository systems and its associated tools). This framework constitutes a solid basis for organizations that are moving towards an effective reuse program. Its elements not only help the organization in adopting reuse, but also guide it in the migration process, reducing its risks and failure possibilities.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Mestrado acadêmico: (19) Doutorado: (5) . Integrantes: Leandro Marques do Nascimento - Integrante / Silvio Romero Lemos Meira - Integrante / Eduardo Santana de Almeida - Coordenador / Daniel Lucrédio - Integrante / Eduardo Cruz Reis Santos - Integrante / Ednaldo Dilorenzo de Souza Filho - Integrante / Frederico Araújo Durão - Integrante / Jorge Cláudio Cordeiro Pires Mascena - Integrante / Taciana Amorim Vanderlei - Integrante / Vinicius Cardoso Garcia - Integrante / Vanilson André de Arruda Burégio - Integrante / Liana Barichisio Lisboa - Integrante / Alexandre Costa Martins - Integrante / Aline Lopes Timóteo - Integrante / Danuza Ferreira Santana Neiva - Integrante / Flávio Mota Medeiros - Integrante / Herberth Braga Gonçalves Ribeiro - Integrante / Hernan Julho Muñoz - Integrante / Ivan do Carmo Machado - Integrante / Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Neto - Integrante / Ricardo de Oliveira Cavalcanti - Integrante / Thiago Henrique Burgos de Oliveira - Integrante / Fernando Raposo da Camara Silva - Integrante / Kellyton dos Santos Brito - Integrante / Rodrigo Cavalcante Mendes - Integrante.Financiador(es): Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Auxílio
										financeiro / Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Bolsa / Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado da Bahia - Bolsa / Centro de Estudos e Sistemas Avançados do Recife - Cooperação.Número de produções C, T & A: 4