2022 - Atual
Climate Change litigation in International Courts and Tribunals
Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (1) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante / Theo Schwarz - Integrante.
2022 - Atual
GEM-DIAMOND Selection: Marie Sklodowska Curie Action - Doctoral Network (MSCA-DN)
Descrição: Personal Scientific Interpretation of theIndividual Research ProjectBenedetta Arrighini?Legal contestation on the rule of law and its impact on EU cooperation in criminal matters withthird parties: EU-MERCOSUR. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Benedetta Arrighini - Integrante.
2021 - Atual
?Mapping the ?community? in community interest Litigation? PIBIC
Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Pedro Jatene - Integrante.
2021 - Atual
The normative legitimacy of the World Health Organization in Brazil
Descrição: La mondialisation a un impact majeur sur la santé des populations. Par exemple, les maladies chroniques à l'échelle mondiale s'amplifient avec le commerce international et les interactions sociales (Huynen et al., 2005). Cette réalité suscite des impératifs croissants de collaboration et de régulation internationale afin de protéger la santé des individus (Hoffman et al., 2019). L'Organisation mondiale de la santé (OMS), seule organisation intergouvernementale internationale dédiée à la santé, se trouve dans une position unique pour encourager l'adhésion des États aux normes prescrivant des objectifs de santé mondiale. Cette adhésion est importante puisque le droit de la santé constitue un outil puissant pour changer des comportements et environnements nocifs pour la santé et favoriser la coordination mondiale des efforts des systèmes de santé (Marks-Sultan et al., 2016). Pour que le leadership normatif de l'OMS se concrétise, les normes internationales adoptées par celle-ci doivent toutefois être suivies par des actions concrètes des acteurs nationaux (décideurs, législateurs, professionnels en santé, etc.). Or, un manque reconnu de données probantes existe pour comprendre l'ampleur et la portée de l'intégration du «droit de l'OMS» au sein des normes étatiques, une démarche pourtant essentielle pour potentialiser ce leadership. Ce manque de données s'explique par diverses raisons. Premièrement, les mécanismes de suivi et de contrôle des instruments normatifs produits par l'OMS reposent principalement sur les rapports d'autoévaluation transmis par les États. Or, la quantité et la qualité des données ainsi obtenues varient. S'agissant de la quantité, les États ne transmettent pas tous des données relatives aux résultats obtenus dans la foulée de l'adoption des instruments normatifs et le volume d'information présentée reste variable. S'agissant de la qualité, le manque de fiabilité des données communiquées par les États a été mis en relief par des groupes d'experts chargés d'évaluer l'efficacité de certains instruments normatifs de l'OMS (OMS, 2015 a); b)). Ce manque de données s'observe aussi au sein de la recherche universitaire. Quelques études intéressantes existent, mais leur nature fragmentaire complique l'évaluation globale de la fonction normative de l'OMS.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (8)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (4) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante / Giulia Tavares Romay de Araújo - Integrante / Vinicius Paiva - Integrante / Giovanna Messner - Integrante / Leonardo Chammas - Integrante / Beatriz Chedid - Integrante / Carla Damian - Integrante / Sofia Ban Diniz - Integrante / Julia dal Pizzol - Integrante / Maria Julia Rosandiski - Integrante / Guilherme Paixão - Integrante / Henrique Lovisi Ennes - Integrante.
2020 - 2022
A IMPLEMENTAÇÃO DAS NORMAS DA ORGANIZAÇÃO MUNDIAL DA SAÚDE NO BRASIL: Um Estudo Empírico em Tempos de COVID-19 PIBIC
Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (3) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Gabriel Rogenfisch Quintans - Integrante / Paula Flanzer - Integrante / Eduardo Augusto Rodrigues dos Santos - Integrante.
2020 - Atual
Os desafios do sistema de governança da saúde global na pandemia Covid-19
Descrição: Esta pesquisa parte da concepção de que a atividade de Regulação no Direito Internacional não é mais exclusivamente baseada nos Estados, mas deriva principalmente de Organizações Internacionais e instituições financeiras e regulatórias transnacionais. Sem embargo, notáveis mudanças na ordem global foram originadas a partir da crise sanitária de proporções internacionais do COVID-19 em 2020. Na medida em que avançava o número de casos pelo mundo, desenvolveu-se a implementação de diferentes modelos de mitigação e supressão da pandemia por cada Estado. Do fechamento de fronteiras até a vigilância em massa e ordem de confinamento total, muitas restrições a garantias e liberdades individuais foram implementadas por países, amparadas por regulações emergenciais.
A excepcionalidade da pandemia COVID-19 invoca questões de Direito Internacional que devem ser levadas em consideração na elaboração de políticas públicas. A partir da aparente retomada do exercício da soberania Estatal nos moldes do Direito Internacional clássico e da ausência de uma resposta integrada dos organismos transnacionais para enfrentamento da pandemia global, questionamentos surgem quanto aos mecanismos de compliance, enforcement e accountability das decisões e dos mecanismos de cooperação no exercício de poder na esfera global; que justificam o estudo de alternativas políticas e jurídicas para regular a governança global no cenário pós-COVID-19. 
Desse modo, o objetivo dessa pesquisa é analisar os novos desafios do multilateralismo à luz das transformações trazidas pela crise sanitária, bem como o funcionamento integrado e as tentativas de cooperação entre os diferentes atores internacionais, de forma a avaliar como a comunidade internacional pode melhor se prevenir para futuras situações emergenciais de mesma magnitude.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (8)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (3) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante / Giulia Tavares Romay de Araújo - Integrante / Vinicius Paiva - Integrante / Giovanna Messner - Integrante / Leonardo Chammas - Integrante / Beatriz Chedid - Integrante / Carla Damian - Integrante / Sofia Ban Diniz - Integrante / Julia dal Pizzol - Integrante / Maria Julia Rosandiski - Integrante / Guilherme Paixão - Integrante.
2020 - Atual
Community Interest, obrigações erga omnes parte e compliance à luz do caso Gambia v Myanmar (ICJ)
Descrição: This project aims to analyse the International Court of Justice?s Order of 23 January 2020 on the Request for the indication of provisional measures submitted by The Gambia against Myanmar under the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. The emblematic nature of this Order in regards to erga omnes partes obligations will be investigated firstly from a theoretical point of view, describing the concepts of jus cogens, erga omnes and erga omnes partes, followed by a summary of the International Court of Justice?s non-linear jurisprudence on obligations erga omnes. Additionally, the expansion of the right of non-injured States to invoke responsibility for erga omnes partes violations will be examined as a consequence of the 2020 Order and the Judgement of 2022. Finally, how the OIC, a non-state actor, can influence cases that involve community interests.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (4)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante / Giulia Tavares Romay de Araújo - Integrante / Pedro Jatene - Integrante / Diana Lise - Integrante / Hassan Almawy - Integrante / Lara Diniz - Integrante.
2019 - 2020
Regulação Internacional e Atores não estatais: Human Rights Treaty Bodies
Descrição: Esta pesquisa parte da concepção de que os mecanismos clássicos do Direito Internacional não retratam a realidade atual. Essa tendência se reflete nas decisões proferidas no âmbito do Direito Internacional, que não são mais exclusivamente baseadas nos Estados, mas derivam principalmente de Organizações Internacionais e instituições financeiras e regulatórias transnacionais. Notáveis mudanças ocorreram na ordem global, como a emergência de novos atores não estatais e novas fontes do Direito Internacional no contexto de globalização. A partir das novas formas de autoridade pública, que não são mais exclusivas aos Estados, desafios surgem quanto a legitimidade e accountability no exercício de poder na esfera global, que justificam o estudo de alternativas políticas e jurídicas para regular a governança global.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Guilherme Soares Rodrigues da Silva - Integrante.
2019 - 2020
Supremo em Números: o Direito Internacional nos Tribunais Superiores Brasileiros
Descrição: The project aims to analyze current perspectives and challenges of International Courts and Tribunals? role in Global Governance.  It is undisputed that, since domestic and international policies are now interwoven, the idea of global governance is significantly important to understand our globalized legal structure. The original concept of ?global governance? can be traced back to Rosenau's definition in the mid-1990s. Due to the expansion of international institutions, conceptual debates have arisen over the years, which have resulted in different interpretations of Global Governance. Currently, thinking in terms of global governance means shifting from a state-centric view to a globalized system of checks and balances that limits national government's political mistakes .
Instead of looking for an exact definition for Global Governance, this research aims to investigate the function of ICTs in a functioning globalized society. The purpose is to go beyond the traditional idea of global governance, focusing not on a restrained functionalist concept, but on analyzing the exercises of authority and the provision of global public goods in an international sphere. Seen in these terms, Von Bogdandy, Dann and Goldmann explain that any governance activity developed by an international institution should be seen as an exercise of international public authority, provided it affects or limits the freedom of any other individual, state or institution . However, the question of which European or international institution should exercise public authority is still a highly contested one. 
This research project aims to better understand new forms of allocation of authority in the global order, specially the role of ICTs, questioning the very concept of public authority. One hypothesis is that viewing public authority as relative allows for greater understanding of both its allocation and its legitimacy. In this context, the study of the ICT?s practice, such as the International Court of Justice, the European and the Inter-American Human Rights? practice is a good source to better assess existing models and challenges to the implementation of global governance practices in International Adjudication.
Moreover, this project departs from a contemporary approach to international adjudication according to which the role of ICTs is not limited to the bilateral dispute settlement between States. They perform other important functions, such as the development of normative expectations ? in order to achieve international adjudication?s full potential, which is the realization of justice. By developing international law, ICTs? functions also encompass the protection and development of the international community and its values.
The first part of this research intends to reflect upon the new trends of international rulemaking and policymaking processes within ICTs, as well as their prescribed procedures and intended consequences for the contemporary legal order. In the second part, an analysis of ICTs? practice aims to explore how alternative and non-traditional tools (such as soft-law instruments) reflect good governance mechanisms and could enhance the promotion of community interests. With the growing number of international institutions and actors attempting to tackle the world's major challenges, this research aims to identity and qualify the International Courts' role in this emerging world order.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Helena Szczupak - Integrante.
2019 - Atual
Expanding access to international justice: The participation of State and Non-State Actors in the International Court of Justice
Descrição: Having the ICJ as a focus, this analysis will address the potential and limits of the participation of Non-State Actors (NSAs), notably as friends of the Court, in contentious and advisory proceedings. Amici curiae ?are those actors who do not themselves have a legally protected interest in the particular case and yet want to intervene?, thereby opening bilateral litigation to issues of public or general interest. Their goal is to ?introduce public interest considerations into the decision ? and, indirectly, to impact on the development of international law?. Despite being accepted and regulated by many courts and tribunals, there remains considerable disagreement within the ICJ in this regard, which appears still reluctant to expand the dispute beyond the limits initially prescribed by the parties to the proceedings.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante / Giulia Tavares Romay de Araújo - Integrante / Pedro Jatene - Integrante.
2019 - Atual
Non-State Actors and Investment Arbitration
Descrição: The present proposal derives from a research project developed at the Jean Monnet Excellence Center of Fundação Getulio Vargas? Rio de Janeiro Law School. It employs a quantitative approach to assess amici curiae participation in investment arbitrations administered by the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID). The main research goal is to empirically evaluate the profile of amici curiae participants in ICSID disputes, outlining, in this sense, (1) the current level of non-State actor participation, (2) how it has developed over time, and (3) what types of interests or considerations they attempt to introduce in ICSID disputes. Accordingly, the paper's hypothesis is that non-State actor participation has gradually evolved over the past couple of decades, going through relevant jurisprudential and institutional innovations, while currently occupying a relevant position among other types of non-disputing parties. In addition, the paper also projects that non-State actors tend to express interests of substantial public concern, pursuant to global public goods and public policy.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (5)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (1) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / MARIANA NOVOTNY MUNIZ - Integrante / RODRIGO BELLOTTI AZEVEDO - Integrante / Giulia Tavares Romay de Araújo - Integrante / Pedro Jatene - Integrante / Daniele Reis - Integrante / Guilherme Soares - Integrante.
2019 - Atual
FGV CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE ON EU-SOUTH AMERICA GLOBAL GOVERNANCE
Descrição: The FGV Centre of Excellence on EU-South America Global Governance focuses on the contribution of the EU for fostering a comparative study on Global Governance and related subjects, taking into account the context and specific demands from the Global South. It envisages joint transnational activities and structural links with academic institutions in Brazil and worldwide in order to share knowledge, develop partnership and joint activities on issues of global governance and beyond.The project represents an opportunity to keep advancing in the EU studies, as an extension of FGV?s Jean Monnet Module (2010-2013) and Chair Actions (2015-2018).
The Centre endorses a comparative analysis on EU and South American Global Governance mechanisms, ensuring greater visibility to this field of study both within FGV and at the Brazilian and South-American levels. The project then responds to an identified need to expand knowledge on the EU governance studies in the Global South. It brings together leading experts of Humanities and Social Sciences, promoting interdisciplinary teaching and research activities. The Centre?s activities, staff and guests are structured around three main core dimensions in order to contribute to the global governance debate in South America: (1) Global Regulation, (2) Global Litigation, and (3) Human Rights and Democracy. It comprises six key activities: (i) new and existing teaching activities; (ii) high-level collaborative research projects, with national and international partners; (iii) international conferences and seminars; (iv) one-week training courses; (v) capacity-building courses; (vi) systematic publications.
The initiative ensures greater visibility to EU-South America Global Governance studies both at national and international levels as the Centre of Excellence are open to students, lawyers and academics of different fields and degrees of education not only from the FGV?s schools and research centres, such as the School of Social Sciences (CPDOC); International Relations; Law Schools from Rio and São Paulo (DIREITO RIO and DIREITO SP); São Paulo School of Business Administration (EAESP); Brazilian School of Public and Business Administration (EBAPE); São Paulo School of Economics (EESP); Brazilian School of Economics and Finance (EPGE); Brazilian Institute of Economics (IBRE); School of Applied Mathematics (EMAp), but also from other renowned higher education institutions in Brazil not normally dealing with EU issues.
In addition, this focal point on EU studies intends to have a major role in reaching out to policy makers, civil servants, organized civil society and general public at large. The proposal opens a channel of dialogue between students/researchers and the EU and foster a network with other higher education institutions in Europe and South America, such as the following that have already been contacted as international partners: Université Libre de Bruxelles; University of Cambridge; Sciences Po Paris; Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne; University of Amsterdam; University of Ferrara; Libera LUISS? Roma; Université de Genève; University of Naples; Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro; Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro; Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro. The Centre will also collaborate with personnel from the European Parliamentary Research Service.
The project delivers an academic added value by providing a platform of cooperation, intellectual exchange and facilitation between the participating academics on EU and related issues. It wishes to create a focal point of competence and knowledge on EU-South America Global Governance in the Getulio Vargas Foundation (FGV), established in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Therefore, the interdisciplinary activities provided by the FGV Centre of Excellence on EU-South America Global Governance will help to increase awa. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (3) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante / Giulia Tavares Romay de Araújo - Integrante / Vinicius Paiva - Integrante / Carla Damian - Integrante.
2019 - Atual
Revista do Centro de Excelência Jean Monnet da FGV Direito Rio
Descrição: A Revista do Centro de Excelência Jean Monnet da FGV Direito Rio surge como iniciativa do Centro de Excelência Jean Monnet sobre EU-South America Global Governance da FGV Direito Rio, que visa a atualizar e informar acerca dos diferentes acontecimentos que movem o mundo, buscando desvendar suas implicações para o Direito Internacional e Europeu, traduzindo situações da realidade fática para a realidade jurídica. As publicações seguem pertinência temática às três linhas d epesquisa do Centro de Excelência Jean Monnet: Global litigation; Global Regulation; Human Rights and Democracy. Pretende lançar boletins mensais online de análise jurídica e política internacional no site do Centro de Excelência Jean Monnet da Escola de Direito do Rio de Janeiro da Fundação Getulio Vargas (direitorio.fgv.br/cejm), com o objetivo de servir de veículo de referência multidisciplinar para os alunos da escola e de outras universidades que desejem obter uma atualização qualificada nos referidos temas.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador.
2019 - Atual
Programa de Pós-graduação Stricto Sensu em Direito da Regulação
Descrição: A partir deste projeto, pretende-se refletir sobre as novas tendências dos processos de formulação normativa internacional por organizações internacionais e entes não estatais (non-state actors), que se materializam em novas fontes (não elencadas no artigo 38 do Estatuto da Corte Internacional de Justiça, como por exemplo Soft Law). Serão abordados os desafios da participação dos entes não estatais na governança global, incluindo questões de legitimidade, accountability e autoridade pública, bem como os procedimentos prescritos e as consequências pretendidas para a ordem jurídica global contemporânea. A partir da análise do panorama regulatório internacional, busca-se analisar a presença e participação dos entes não estatais nas cortes internacionais, a emergência de bens públicos globais (global public goods) no processo de adjudicação internacional e seus desafios. Visa também avaliar mecanismos de boa governança e o papel das autoridades regulatórias transnacionais nas negociações e processo de tomada de decisões internacionais. Empenha-se, ainda, a partir dos estudos realizados, em propor considerações sobre o provimento valores da comunidade internacional, expressos em global public goods, como os
direitos humanos, o direito a um meio ambiente saudável, à saúde e ao desenvolvimento. Ademais, dispõe-se a apresentar possíveis alternativas políticas e jurídicas para os desafios a serem apresentados, bem como os mecanismos de compliance e enforcement. Para essa finalidade, busca-se estabelecer uma agenda para o desenvolvimento de pesquisas no campo de Regulação Internacional e Governança Global, que ainda é um tópico de pesquisa pouco estudado na América Latina. Por fim, objetiva ampliar o
conhecimento sobre a prática da produção normativa nos diferentes contextos regulatórios, além de estimular o interesse no desenvolvimento de pesquisas sobre produção normativa dos órgãos reguladores em âmbito internacional.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador.
2018 - Atual
Supremacy of International Law vs. National Fundamental Principles: a Brazilian perspective
Descrição: This research is part of a project directed by prof. Fulvio Maria Palombino, University of Naples Federico II, on the ?Supremacy of International Law vs. National Fundamental Principles. A Comparative Law Perspective?.
Our contribution aims to provide a comparative law perspective on supremacy of International Law vs. national fundamental principles in Brazil. Taking Brazilian historical and recent context into account, the current research intends to evaluate the interaction between international law and constitutional law in Brazil with regards to incorporation and application by domestic authorities, as well as its challenges and possible solutions.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Gabriela Porto - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 2
2017 - Atual
Judicial Dialogue: the interaction between the International Court of Justice and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
Descrição: This research is part of a project developed by prof. Archilles Skordas, from the University of Copenhagen, Faculty of Law, iCourts (Center of Excellence for International Courts). It intends to critically reflect on cutting-edge issues relevant to the ICJ and its jurisprudence. For instance, it will explore therefore whether or not the ICJ is still an influential player in the era of proliferation of specialized international courts and tribunals (ICs), and discuss the scope of its authority and impact, as well as the interaction between the ICJ and other ICs and national courts.
In particular, our research aims to discuss the impact of the ICJ jurisprudence in the case-law of the Inter-American Court and vice versa, and the points of potential convergence or divergence. It is also intends to look whether there are efforts to avoid incompatibility, without any ?real? convergence.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (3) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Geir Ulfstein - Integrante / Karin Oellers-Frahm - Integrante / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante / Georg Nolte - Integrante / Eirik Bjorge - Integrante / Michael Wood - Integrante / Eran Sthoeger - Integrante / Gleider Hernandez - Integrante / Daniel Joyce - Integrante / Gregor Noll - Integrante / Paulina Starski - Integrante / Robert Kolb - Integrante / Malcolm Evans - Integrante / Jeff Dunhoff - Integrante / Ulla Neergaard - Integrante / Linos-Alexandre Sicilianos - Integrante / Oren Gross - Integrante / Nigel White - Integrante / Andreas Paulus - Integrante / Iryna Marchuk - Integrante / Steven McDowell - Integrante / Mikael Madsen - Integrante / Achilles Skordas - Integrante / Russell Buchan - Integrante / Nandor Knust - Integrante / Eyal Benvenisti - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 3
2017 - Atual
The Mercosur dispute settlement system
Descrição: This research is part of a project developed by the Max Planck Institute Luxembourg for Procedural Law, directed by prof. Hélène Ruiz-Fabri. The Max Planck Encyclopedia of International Procedural Law (EiPro) aims at providing a comprehensive study of international law by examining it from a procedural perspective. The Encyclopedia aims to reflect the current state of legal and interdisciplinary research in the field as well as promote cutting-edge research in this under-explored area in order to fill the current void of studies focusing on international procedure. The scope of the project will not be limited to the procedural rules themselves but will also include those who make and implement them. 
In particular, our contribution intends to evaluate the Mercosur dispute settlement system through a procedural lens.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante.Financiador(es): Max Planck Institute Luxembourg for International - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 1
2017 - Atual
Supremo em Números
Descrição: This research intends to assess the applicability of International and Human Rights Law by Brazilian Superior Tribunals through an empirical analysis guided by the FGV?s ?Supremo em Números? database.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Michael Mohalen - Integrante / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante / Ivar Hartmann - Integrante.Financiador(es): Fundação Getúlio Vargas - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 2
2017 - Atual
The Quest for Universality and Access to Justice in Human Rights Litigation
Descrição: This project aims to analyze the mechanisms by which third-parties may participate in Human Rights Litigation, such as intervention and amicus curiae briefs; and also to compare their applicability in different International Courts, i.e., International Court of Justice, Inter-American Court of Human Rights and European Court of Human Rights. In this context, the proposal is to ?open up the courtroom? and expand access to justice to a wider international community, in contrast to a traditional view of International Law, which is exclusively based on state consent. Ultimately, it will analyze the role that universality may play in international adjudication, i.e., the very relationship between human rights litigation and the quest for universality.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Serena Forlati - Integrante / Michael Mohallem - Integrante / Lígia Fabris Campos - Integrante / Emmanuelle Bribosia - Integrante / Isabelle Rorive - Integrante / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante / Raphael Vasconcelos - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 2
2016 - 2019
Global Law in Context
Descrição: Nos dias de hoje, com a celeridade em que o mundo se encontra, manter-se atualizado é primordial. Mais do que conhecer o que ocorre ao longo do globo, agora é imprescindível entender suas consequências, implicações e perspectivas. Os fenômenos de hoje movem o mundo e, com ele, o Direito Internacional e Europeu, que se atualiza, se intensifica, se altera, sendo questionado e desafiado a todo instante.
Assim, estudar e entender o Direito Internacional se tornou, atualmente, um grande desafio. Não basta conhecer suas diretrizes e normas. Torna-se cada vez mais patente a necessidade de entender os acontecimentos que são, ao mesmo tempo, regulados por essas normas e os responsáveis por suas mudanças. Tais acontecimentos, ao colocarem em teste a aplicação das normas de Direito Internacional, por muitas vezes apontam novas formas de interpretá-las ou até mesmo de utilizá-las de maneira mais efetiva, de forma a alcançar sua finalidade última: a realização da justiça.
Nesse sentido surge o Global Law in Context. Uma iniciativa da Cátedra Jean Monnet da FGV Direito Rio, que visa atualizar e informar acerca dos diferentes acontecimentos que movem o mundo, buscando desvendar suas implicações para o Direito Internacional e Europeu, traduzindo situações da realidade fática para a realidade jurídica.
O projeto, portanto, pretende lançar boletins mensais online de análise jurídica e política internacional no site da Cátedra Jean Monnet da Escola de Direito do Rio de Janeiro da Fundação Getulio Vargas (http://direitorio.fgv.br/jean-monnet-chair), com o objetivo de servir de veículo de referência multidisciplinar para os alunos da escola e de outras universidades que desejem obter uma atualização qualificada nos referidos temas.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Maria Fernanda Dyma - Integrante / Paulina Boéchat - Integrante / Gabriela Porto - Integrante / José Eduardo Cury - Integrante / Júlia Knauer - Integrante / Larissa Souza - Integrante / Letícia Gonçalves - Integrante.
2016 - 2017
O problema da implementação e cumprimento das decisões de tribunais internacionais
Descrição: Em que medida a inobservância de decisões internacionais pode comprometer o sucesso da solução das controvérsias no nível global? Podemos considerar este grau de observância como algo crítico para a avaliação da performance do mecanismo de solução de controvérsias internacionais? Estes questionamentos serão avaliados no que tange à Corte Internacional de Justiça.
Esta pesquisa parte de uma abordagem multifuncional do processo de adjudicação internacional, abordando se o sucesso de uma corte internacional depende de sua habilidade de preencher significativamente, ao longo do tempo, as funções que lhe são atribuídas pelos seus instrumentos constitutivos, ao mesmo tempo em que mantém sua legitimidade em relação às partes e, de maneira mais ampla, em relação ao seu ?eleitorado?. 
Além disso, o nível de sucesso das cortes internacionais deve ser analisado sob o pano de fundo das especificidades do Direito Internacional. Notavelmente, a implementação de julgamentos é fundamental tanto para a efetividade quanto para a legitimidade percebida de qualquer sistema judicial; no entanto, devido ao déficit de mecanismos institucionais plenos de enforcement, a execução das decisões internacionais não-raro depende do consentimento dos Estados. Simultaneamente, as cortes internacionais, especialmente a CIJ, interpretam com autoridade as normas do Direito Internacional e contribuem para o desenvolvimento deste; assim, para se avaliar o nível de sucesso destas cortes, é essencial avaliarmos a forma como exercem sua função criativa de Direito.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 1
2016 - 2017
A Recepção e o Tratamento dos Refugiados no Brasil: Uma Análise Jurídico-Política a Partir do Caso Sírio
Descrição: A problematização dos refugiados sírios é de extrema relevância para o Brasil. Entretanto, o interesse na recepção e na concessão de asilo não é suficiente para a garantia dos Direitos Humanos dessas pessoas. Para que possa garantir condições mínimas para os refugiados, com inserção social e econômica é necessário planejamento e estudo da situação jurídico-política do país, verificando quais são os meios viáveis de fazê-lo cumprindo com obrigações tanto da legislação interna quanto de tratados e convenções internacionais. 
Dessa forma, o objetivo desse trabalho é o de observar os tratados internacionais em geral, os ratificados pelo Brasil e a normas internas que regulam sobre asilo e imigração. Tudo para que se verifique a situação brasileira, as possibilidades e obrigações do país acerca da questão dos refugiados sírios, que devem ser considerados em planejamentos futuros para recepcionamento de refugiados, bem como para a situação atual, visando garantir, sobretudo, a qualidade de uma nova vida para os refugiados.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador.Número de produções C, T & A: 1
2016 - Atual
Non-Compliance as a Failure of International Courts?
Descrição: This research is part of the project ?DEBACLES: Illusions and Failures in the History of International Adjudication?, directed by Hélène Ruiz-Fabri and Lorenzo Gradoni (senior researcher), from the Max Planck Institute Luxembourg for International, European and Regulatory Procedural Law. 
Our joint-research, together with Serena Forlati, departs from a multifunctional approach to international adjudication, whereby the success or failure of an international court depends on its ability to meaningfully fulfil, over time, the functions it is entrusted with under its constitutive instruments, while at the same time upholding its legitimacy towards the contracting Parties and, more broadly, towards its ͚constituencies͛. This encompasses the ICJ as both an instrument of the parties and an organ of a value-based international community. Moreover, the success or failure of international courts should be assessed against the background of the specificities of international law.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (1) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Luca Pasquet - Integrante / Serena Forlati - Integrante / Wim Muller - Integrante / Ingo Venzke - Integrante / Ignacio De la Rasilla y del Moral - Integrante / Daniel Litwin - Integrante / Michel Erpelding - Integrante / Nicolas Kang-Riou - Integrante / Olivier Barsalou - Integrante / Athanasios Chouliaras - Integrante / Dalia Palombo - Integrante / Emanuel Castellarin - Integrante / Nikitas Hatzimihail - Integrante / Ksenia Polonskaya - Integrante / Yuliya Chernykh - Integrante / Henri de Waele - Integrante / Freya Baetens - Integrante / André Nunes Chaib - Integrante / Mariana Peña-Pinon - Integrante / Konstantinos D. Magliveras - Integrante / Evelyn Mogere - Integrante / Heejin Kim - Integrante / Patrycja Grzebyk - Integrante / Luigi Prosperi - Integrante / Sergey Vasiliev - Integrante / Di Gore Simmala - Integrante / Yael Vias Gvirsman - Integrante / Gabriele Della Morte - Integrante.Financiador(es): Max Planck Institute Luxembourg for International - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 2
2016 - Atual
Procedure of International Courts and Tribunals: Third-party Intervention before the ICJ
Descrição: Project developed in the framework of the Committee on the Procedure of International Courts and Tribunals, directed by Professor Hélène Ruiz Fabri (French): Co-Chair Professor Shotaro Hamamoto (Japanese): Co-Chair Professor Philippe Sands QC (British): Co-Chair Dr Arman Sarvarian (British): Co-Rapporteur Dr Filippo Fontanelli (Italian): Co-Rapporteur. The mandate of the Committee is twofold: 1) to identify and analyse procedural issues arising in the practice of select international courts and tribunals; and 2) to formulate proposals for procedural reform to address them for the consideration by the select courts and tribunals. From the broad range of possible procedural issues, three areas have been selected for (initial) consideration by the Committee: 1) evidence; 2) case management; and 3) preliminary objections. This mandate will focus on procedural reform in the following select international courts and tribunals: 1) International Court of Justice (?ICJ?); 2) International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (?ITLOS?); 3) Permanent Court of Arbitration (?PCA?); and 4) World Trade Organization (?WTO?). Other international courts and tribunals (e.g. ? investment arbitration) may be considered if possible within the time frame of this mandate or in an extension of the project if appropriate. 
In particular, our research intends to assess the procedural reform proposals concerning third-party intervention before the International Court of Justice and the ITLOS.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (3) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Geir Ulfstein - Integrante / Serena Forlati - Integrante / Gabrielle Marceau - Integrante / Illy Ousséni - Integrante / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante / Loretta Malintoppi - Integrante / Laurence Boisson de Chazournes - Integrante / Davinia Aziz Alternate - Integrante / Alain Pellet - Integrante / Gonzalo Villalta Puig - Integrante / Hervé Ascensio - Integrante / Shashank Kumar - Integrante / David Ruzié Mr Atip Latipulhayat - Integrante / Matthew Happold - Integrante / Arshad Ghaffar - Integrante / James Devaney - Integrante / Christopher Ward SC - Integrante / Andrea Gattini - Integrante / Enrique Hernández Sierra - Integrante / Makane Mbengue - Integrante / Lorenzo Gradoni - Integrante / Anna Marie Brennan - Integrante / Justice Ronnie Boodoosingh - Integrante / Calvin Hamilton - Integrante / Yuval Shany - Integrante / Gilad Noam - Integrante / Louise Reilly - Integrante / Luana Pedrosa de Figueiredo Cruz - Integrante / Manuel Almeida de Ribeiro - Integrante / Aziz Tuffi Saliba - Integrante / Francisco Pereira Coutinho - Integrante / Carlos Henrique Haddad - Integrante / Francisco Pascual Vives - Integrante / Diego Fernández Arroyo - Integrante / Alfred Soons - Integrante / James Graham - Integrante / Chiara Giorgetti - Integrante / Oluwabunmi Lar - Integrante / Jeffrey Dunoff - Integrante / Davorin Lapa? - Integrante / Andreas Zimmerman - Integrante / Joanna Gomula - Integrante / Stephan Schill - Integrante / Etleva Haka - Integrante / Christian Tams - Integrante / Stratis Georgilas - Integrante / Judge Rüdiger Wolfrum - Integrante / Constantinos Salonidis - Integrante / Milenko Kreća - Integrante / Noemi Gal-Or - Integrante / Rodoljub Etinski - Integrante / Yuji Iwasawa - Integrante / Marina Trunk-Fedorova - Integrante / Hironobu Sakai - Integrante / Stephan Wittich - Integrante / Mariko Kawano - Integrante / Dai Tamada - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 3
2016 - Atual
Enhancing ICJ procedures in order to promote community interests
Descrição: This project was developed under the scope of the ESIL Interest Group on International Courts and Tribunals for the Annual Conference of 2017. It aims to study the capacity of International Courts? procedural mechanisms in promoting global public goods by adjudicating inter-State claims. One of the main obstacles faced by the World Court relates to the existing tension between the bilateral nature of its own proceedings and the multilateral nature of the conflicting substantive law. Considering that procedure may guide and shape the application of substantive law, the study argues that it should itself be interpreted and developed in a manner to ensure community interests. Ultimately, the analysis shows that most procedural rules can be adjusted and tailored for multiparty aspects with the aim of protecting community interests and enhancing the international court?s legitimacy. This may raise particular questions in cases of global public goods litigation, notably: intervention of third parties; participation of non-state actors as amici curiae; fact-finding powers and rules on evidence; burden and standard of proof; and indication of provisional measures.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 3
2016 - Atual
Debacles: illusions and failures in the history of international adjudication
Descrição: Encouraged by the post-Cold War rise of international adjudication, most international lawyers ? with some notable recent exceptions ? have focused their attention on judicial ?success stories.? They have thereby revitalized a liberal-modernist narrative that views the constant expansion and improvement of international adjudication as historically ineluctable. Against this background, the DEBACLES project casts an unconventional light on the history of international adjudication, bringing to the foreground its many illusions and failures, the paths it has not taken, and, more generally, the nonlinearity of its developments.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (3) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Integrante / Hélène Ruiz-Fabri - Coordenador / Luca Pasquet - Integrante / Serena Forlati - Integrante / Wim Muller - Integrante / Ingo Venzke - Integrante / Ignacio De la Rasilla y del Moral - Integrante / Daniel Litwin - Integrante / Michel Erpelding - Integrante / Nicolas Kang-Riou - Integrante / Olivier Barsalou - Integrante / Athanasios Chouliaras - Integrante / Dalia Palombo - Integrante / Emanuel Castellarin - Integrante / Nikitas Hatzimihail - Integrante / Ksenia Polonskaya - Integrante / Yuliya Chernykh - Integrante / Henri de Waele - Integrante / Freya Baetens - Integrante / André Nunes Chaib - Integrante / Mariana Peña-Pinon - Integrante / Konstantinos D. Magliveras - Integrante / Evelyn Mogere - Integrante / Heejin Kim - Integrante / Patrycja Grzebyk - Integrante / Luigi Prosperi - Integrante / Sergey Vasiliev - Integrante / Di Gore Simmala - Integrante / Yael Vias Gvirsman - Integrante / Gabriele Della Morte - Integrante.Financiador(es): Max Planck Institute Luxembourg for International - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2015 - 2019
Cátedra Jean Monnet
Descrição: The project meets the objectives and priorities of the Jean Monnet Chair and is suitable for fostering the development of new teaching, compulsory and optional courses, research and debating activities with the involvement of key staff members and professors from partner institutions from Latin America and Europe. It will promote European studies and Comparative Regionalism at the Getulio Vargas Foundation, to ensure greater visibility to this field of study both within FGV and at a Brazilian national level, which to date is a country still to be adequately covered by the Jean Monnet Action in view of to its continental dimension and importance. In addition to this, Latin American sub-regional organizations are increasingly affected by European aspects, justifying the need to promote better knowledge of EU Law.
The purpose of the project on EU Comparative Regionalism Studies is to provide students with a comparative analysis of different sub-regional integration organizations in Latin America and their diverse stage of development, including institutions, legal order and dispute settlement mechanism. Their similarities and distinctions with the EU and their interaction with other sub-regional and regional organizations will also be evaluated, to include the perception of their legitimacy by States and individuals involved.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (18)  / Especialização: (10)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2)  / Mestrado profissional: (2) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Evandro Carvalho - Integrante / Michael Mohalen - Integrante / Melina Rocha Luckic - Integrante / Danielle da Costa Leite Borges - Integrante / Renato Galvão Flôres Junior - Integrante / Lígia Fabris Campos - Integrante / Emmanuelle Bribosia - Integrante / Isabelle Rorive - Integrante / Leonardo de Andrade Costa - Integrante / Anne Weyembergh - Integrante / Ramona Coman - Integrante / Michel Levi - Integrante / Gabriela Hühne Porto - Integrante / Evandro Carvalho de Menezes - Integrante / Monique Sochaczewski Goldfeld - Integrante / Raphael Carvalho de Vasconcelos - Integrante / Ivar Alberto Martins Hartmann - Integrante.Financiador(es): Comissão Européia - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 2
2015 - 2018
Southern perspectives on the Responsibility to Protect?: R2P and the foreign policy identities of India, Brazil, and South Africa
Descrição: The debate about R2P can be seen as part of a fundamental debate about changing norms and re-defining standards in a less western and ever more multipolar world with serious power shifts and a changing world order. Both, the debate and the emerging new order, requires the active participation of emerging powers from the ?Global South?, among which the positions of the southern democracies India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA) are of particular interest and special importance. On the one hand, all three are pluralistic democracies including a free press, functioning democratic institutions and a mostly liberal economic order. Thus they are quite similar to ?the democratic West? and seem to have corresponding views and ideals in terms of fundamental human rights and democratic principles. On the other hand, on important issues of global order and international politics they take substantially different views and beliefs. This is also true with regard to the evolving political concept of R2P.
R2P is a highly debated political concept integrating a whole array of decisive and important norms and principles relevant for an emerging multipolar or at least different world order such as: sovereignty, state equality, prohibition on the use of force, territorial integrity, multilateralism, interventionism, the legality and legitimacy of the use of force, power, human rights, role and reform of the United Nations (Security Council), role of regional arrangements and organizations, assistance and prevention. For these reasons it is of uttermost interest and importance to learn about, understand and discuss the positions of important southern countries such as India, Brazil and South Africa towards this concept and the norms and principles.
We would like to reflect on and discuss the following questions:
How do leading southern emerging democracies understand R2P and its fundamental norms and principles and what are their major concerns?
How do these norms and principles correspond with the (foreign policy) culture/identity (values, world views, philosophy, history, tradition, religion, habits) of each of these countries?
Do southern and western democracies think of the same thing when they talk about terms like sovereignty, human rights, prevention, multilateralism etc.?
How do IBSA countries envisage the future development of R2P without diluting its core principles? 
How can we come closer to a broader and deeper consensus of the Responsibility to Protect and its implementation and how can the ?West? address the concerns of the ?South? in an appropriate manner?. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (3) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Integrante / Daniel Peters - Coordenador / Dan Krause - Integrante / Lothar Brock - Integrante / Tobias Debiel - Integrante / Michael Haspel - Integrante / Gunther Hauser - Integrante / Manuel Fröhlich - Integrante / Bernhard Koch - Integrante / Chris Landsberg - Integrante / Rama Mani - Integrante / Raja Mohan - Integrante / August Pradetto - Integrante / Philipp Rotmann - Integrante / Michael Staack - Integrante / Jörn Thießen - Integrante.
2015 - Atual
International Courts and Tribunals (Latin American Society of International Law)
Descrição: The Interest Group on International Courts and Tribunals, established under the auspices of the Latin American Society of International Law (LASIL), will foster general theoretical and practical discussions regarding the legal aspects of international courts and tribunals among scholars and practitioners, focusing on the functions, legitimacy, and case law of international courts and tribunals. It also deals with their role in the development of international law and the necessary dialogue and cooperation between different courts and tribunals, as well as with national courts.
Secondly, another relevant topic of the Interest Group concerns Latin American participation and contribution to international courts and tribunals. The activities of the Group intend to cover the Latin American cases submitted before the International Court of Justice, the Arbitration Tribunals, the WTO Dispute Settlement Mechanism, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the Court of Justice of the Andean Community, the Central American Court of Justice, and the Mercosur Dispute Settlement System. The goal is to evaluate the Latin American contribution to the development of international law through the peaceful settlement of international disputes.
The objectives of the Interest Group will be pursued by a network of scholars and practicing lawyers who share information and reflections on these topics. In particular, the group will stimulate academic debate through the organization of conferences, meetings, and the setting up of research projects and joint publications.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (4) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Ana Elizabeth Villalta Vizcarra - Integrante / Alejandro Perotti - Integrante / Antonio Remiro Brotons - Integrante / M. Amparo Alcoceba Gallego - Integrante / André Panno Beirão - Integrante / Angel Horna - Integrante / Agustín Hernández Grebe - Integrante / Cristián Delpiano - Integrante / Eleonora Mesquita Ceia - Integrante / Elvira Badilla - Integrante / Ena Carnero Arroyo - Integrante / Florisbela M G N Meykuecht - Integrante / Giovanna Maria Frisso - Integrante / Jean Ditzz Ribeiro - Integrante / Jean-Marc Sorel - Integrante / José Manuel Alvarez - Integrante / Leonardo Nemer - Integrante / Liliana Obregón - Integrante / Lilian del Castillo - Integrante / Luis Gonzalez Garcia - Integrante / Maria Juliana Tenorio - Integrante / Maria Selenny Cossio Rios - Integrante / María Teresa Infante - Integrante / Mariana de Araujo Mendes Lima - Integrante / Michael Mohallem - Integrante / Michelle Ratton - Integrante / Miriam Cohen - Integrante / Nicolás Alarcón Loayza - Integrante / Pablo Sandonato de Leon - Integrante / Rafael Zelesco Barretto - Integrante / Ricardo Abello-Galvis - Integrante / Robston Nelson - Integrante / Rosa Cortado - Integrante / Salem Nasser - Integrante / M. Sasaki - Integrante / Silvana Insignares - Integrante / Ximena Fuentes - Integrante / Ximena Gauchê Marchetti - Integrante / Walter Arevalo - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 3
2014 - 2018
The Legitimacy of International Trade Tribunals: the case of Mercosur
Descrição: This research is linked to a project directed by Robert House (NYU); Hélène Ruiz-Fabri (MPI Luxembourg); Geir Ulfstein (University of Oslo); Michelle Zang (University of Oslo), aiming at exploring the legitimacy role of a number of trade courts and tribunals. It will be primarily based on legal analysis but will also include contributions from political scientists and legal philosophers. The first part of the research will examine selected trade tribunals in accordance with the relevant research questions; and the second part will comprise comparative studies across different trade tribunals, including ASEAN; ANDEAN Community; Federal Court of Canada; CEMAC (Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa); Central American Court of Justice; CIS (Commonwealth of Independent States); EAC (East Africa Community); EFTA; EU; MERCOSUR; WAEMU (West African Economic and Monetary Union); WTO; and U.S. Court of International Trade. New developments, such as increased access of non-parties and the public (the increasing transnational character of the tribunals) and interaction with national courts, will be emphasized. 
Particularly concerning Mercosur tribunals, our article aims to assess legitimacy issues by evaluating three main factors: procedures in dispute settlement; nomination and composition of tribunals; and decision-making process. Such factors seem closely interrelated and interdependent in terms of their effects on legitimacy. Since the Mercosur dispute settlement system usually lacks transparency, which is essential to ensure democratic legitimacy, this article relied on interviews in order to reveal the sub-regional practice where politics play a fundamental role. Mercosur State Parties face constant tension between the need to solve conflicts, on the one hand, and the refusal to submit to coercive modalities of dispute settlement, on the other. They prefer diplomatic procedures, combined with arbitration to solve conflicts derived from Mercosur laws, without interference from an external authority. In this context, this article intends to demonstrate that the lack of a jurisdictional body with all its related consequences implies serious challenges capable of compromising the legitimacy of the Mercosur dispute settlement system.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Gabrielle Marceau - Integrante / Halvard Haukeland Fredriksen - Integrante / Maureen Irish - Integrante / James Thuo Gathii - Integrante / Michael Ewing-Chow - Integrante / Ranyta Yusran - Integrante / Reto Malacrida - Integrante / P. J. Kuijper - Integrante / Donald C. Pogue - Integrante / Miguel Antonio Villamizar - Integrante / Rilka Dragneva-Lewers - Integrante / Ousseni Illy - Integrante / Theresa Squatrito - Integrante / Michelle Zang - Integrante / Ole Kristian Fauchald - Integrante / Andreas Follesdal - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 1
2014 - 2016
A Latin American Guide to the International Court of Justice Case Law
Descrição: This project aims to analyze all cases involving Latin American countries at the International Court of Justice (ICJ) since its creation in order to identify common trends regarding legal proceedings at the universal level and the role of Latin America in the peaceful settlement of disputes. The project will culminate with the publication of a book in English gathering all cases involving Latin American countries at the International Court of Justice and containing a summary of the cases timetable, general and specific bibliography.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Fundação Getúlio Vargas - Auxílio
										financeiro.
2014 - Atual
Legitimacy of International Trade Tribunals
Descrição: The project aims at exploring the legitimacy role of a number of trade courts and tribunals. It will be primarily based on legal analysis but will also include contributions from political scientists and legal philosophers. The first part of the research will examine selected trade tribunals in accordance with the relevant research questions; and the second part will comprise comparative studies across different trade tribunals, including ASEAN; ANDEAN Community; Federal Court of Canada; CEMAC (Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa); Central American Court of Justice; CIS (Commonwealth of Independent States); EAC (East Africa Community); EFTA; EU; MERCOSUR; WAEMU (West African Economic and Monetary Union); WTO; and U.S. Court of International Trade. New developments, such as increased access of non-parties and the public (the increasing transnational character of the tribunals) and interaction with national courts, will be emphasized.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Integrante / Robert Howse - Integrante / Hélène Ruiz Fabri - Integrante / Geir Ulfstein - Coordenador / Gabrielle Marceau - Integrante / Pieter-Jan Kuijper - Integrante / Halvard Haukeland Fredriksen - Integrante / Donald Pogue - Integrante / Maureen Irish - Integrante / James Thuo Gathii - Integrante / Illy Ousséni - Integrante / Rilka Dragneva - Integrante / Michael Ewing-Chow - Integrante / Ranyta Yusran - Integrante / Alan Yanovich - Integrante / Miguel Villamizar - Integrante.
2013 - 2016
Latin America and the International Court of Justice: Contributions to International Law
Descrição: This project aims to evaluate the contribution of Latin America to the development of international law at the International Court of Justice (ICJ). It includes historical contributions of the region to the peaceful settlement of disputes through the emergence of international jurisdictions, as well as an analysis of Latin American cases brought before the ICJ, their contribution to the development of international law, and their effects throughout the region. This shows how Latin American states have become increasingly committed to the peaceful settlement of disputes and to the promotion of international law through adjudication. It culminates with an expansion of the traditional understanding of the function of the ICJ by Latin American states, including an analysis of existing challenges in the region. The assessment of the impact of ICJ?s decisions over the region includes the evaluation of how governments, parliaments, national courts, and other domestic actors and institutions interact with the authority of ICJ decisions. The project is jointly coordinated by the IREDIES (Institut de recherche en droit international et européen de la Sorbonne) and the Escola de Direito do Rio de Janeiro da Fundação Getulio Vargas Law.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Jean-Marc Sorel - Integrante / Antonio Remiro Brotons - Integrante / Leonardo Nemer - Integrante / Liliana Obregón - Integrante / Luis Gonzalez Garcia - Integrante / María Teresa Infante - Integrante / Miriam Cohen - Integrante / Pablo Sandonato de Leon - Integrante / Ricardo Abello-Galvis - Integrante / Rosa Cortado - Integrante / Ximena Fuentes - Integrante / Walter Arevalo - Integrante / ANTONIO AUGUSTO CONCADO TRINDADE - Integrante / karel wellens - Integrante / Beatrice Bonafé - Integrante / Karin Oellers-Frahm - Integrante / Cristina Hoss - Integrante / Guy Goodwin-Gill - Integrante / Cesare Romano - Integrante / Alfred Boll - Integrante / Efthymios Papastavridis - Integrante / Virginie Tassin - Integrante / Tulio Scovazzi - Integrante / Chie Kojima - Integrante / Yoshifumi Tanaka - Integrante / Mariana Durney - Integrante / Martin Dawidowicz - Integrante / Sandrine Maljean-Dubois - Integrante / Vanessa Richard - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 2
2013 - Atual
Direito Global e suas Alternativas Metodológicas
Descrição: Pensar o Direito Internacional a partir da reflexão crítica sobre Direito Global e novas formas de interação entre os campos nacionais, transnacionais e internacional demanda uma reflexão sobre os métodos de ensino e pesquisa do Direito Internacional no curso de Direito no Brasil. O Direito Internacional como ciência tem passado por uma série de questionamentos sobre a sua especificidade como disciplina no campo do Direito, mas também no seu processo crescentemente legalizado, porém fragmentado. Em que medida e por quais meios isto atinge o Brasil? Será que as nossas faculdades e universidades têm tido capacidade de apreender e sistematizar estas mudanças? As particularidades do país, sua forma de inserção internacional e seu contexto regional têm sido levados em consideração? O isolamento da disciplina no debate internacional e seu distanciamento de outros campos no Brasil favorecem a apresentação de questões específicas sobre a disciplina e suas formas de trabalho no Brasil, mas também o retorno a um debate interdisciplinar no campo das Ciências Sociais. Neste sentido, este projeto pretende abrir uma frente para produção de textos críticos sobre a temática, incluindo o diálogo interdisciplinar com as Relações Internacionais, e a formação de uma rede de professores e pesquisadores no Brasil que considerem estas reflexões em seus trabalhos.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Integrante / Adriane Sanctis de Brito - Integrante / André Rodrigues Correa - Integrante / Deisy de Freitas Lima Ventura - Integrante / Evandro Carvalho - Integrante / José Garcez Ghirardi - Integrante / Michelle Ratton Sanchez Badin - Coordenador / Paulo Guedes - Integrante / Nicole Fobe - Integrante / Patrícia Alencar - Integrante / Rabih Ali Nasser - Integrante / Salem H. Nasser - Integrante / Júlia Trindade de Sá - Integrante.
2012 - 2013
O acesso aos direitos dos trabalhadores imigrantes brasileiros em Massachusetts
Descrição: De acordo com a Organização Internacional do Trabalho, os trabalhadores imigrantes não documentados são uma das minorias mais suscetíveis a violações de direitos humanos e se encontram em uma situação de extrema vulnerabilidade nos países em que vivem. Isso porque, em virtude do receio de serem deportados, estão mais sujeitos à exploração e extorsão por parte dos seus empregadores e dos agentes de imigração. Por isso, mostra-se relevante investigar aspectos das condições de vida desses trabalhadores nos países receptores. O presente trabalho focará num grupo específico: os trabalhadores não documentados brasileiros que moram no estado norte-americano de Massachusetts (MA). Optou-se por este tema porque, apesar da grande quantidade de brasileiros morando nos EUA, em geral, e em Massachusetts, em especial, existem poucos estudos jurídicos sobre os mesmos. Além disso, a escolha do estado de Massachusetts se justifica por ser um dos três estados com as maiores populações de brasileiros, juntamente com Flórida e Nova Jérsei. Sendo assim, e não obstante a importância de estudos sociológicos a respeito dos imigrantes brasileiros (que identificam e analisam os brasileiros que se deslocam para exercer atividades remuneradas no país ou os motivos que os levaram a deixar sua nação de origem), entendemos ser essencial o desenvolvimento de pesquisas que analisem as relações de tensão subjacentes ao importante tema do acesso a direitos por esses imigrantes não documentados. Os brasileiros não documentados têm acesso a direitos em Massachusetts? Será que seu status jurídico importa para o gozo dos direitos?. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (1) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador / Paula Spieler - Integrante / Celina Mendes de Almeida - Integrante.
2012 - 2013
Global Powers and Africa Project 2012
Descrição: O objeto da pesquisa, que se insere no projeto Global Powers and Africa Project 2012, é de avaliar como o Brasil tem influenciado o desenvolvimento das normas relativas à responsabilidade de proteger e como poderia influenciar outros países dos grupos BRICS e IBSA (Índia, Brasil e África do Sul) na regulação da intervenção humanitária perante o Conselho de Segurança e a Assembleia Geral da ONU.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador.Número de produções C, T & A: 1
2010 - 2015
Módulo Jean Monnet de Direito da União Europeia
Descrição: Projeto apoiado pela Comissão Europeia, associado ao Centro de Justiça e Sociedade (CJUS) da FGV Direito Rio, linha de pesquisa: Justiça Global e Direitos Humanos, que tem como objetivo geral analisar temas relacionados aos sistemas de integração, do ponto de vista institucional e material, em uma ótica comparada. Possui duas frentes: ensino do Direito da União Europeia no âmbito do Módulo Europeu do Programa Jean Monnet da FGV Direito Rio, que visa disseminar o conhecimento a respeito de temas relacionados à integração europeia com a chancela oficial da Comissão Europeia, bem como a elaboração de pesquisas orientadas pela coordenação do curso e consequente publicação de livros contendo análises sobre temas da atualidade europeia e latino-americana, produzidas pelos alunos do curso Módulo Jean Monnet, oferecido pela FGV Direito Rio. Até o momento, foram publicados 4 volumes da revista. Para mais informações, consulte:
http://direitorio.fgv.br/internacional/modulojeanmonnet/revistajeanmonet. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (30)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (3)  / Mestrado profissional: (4) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Coordenador.Financiador(es): Comissão Européia - Bolsa.Número de produções C, T & A: 14
2010 - 2011
Migrations Internationales
Descrição: Le travailleur migrant en situation irrégulière relève de trois sous-catégories juridiques (travailleur, migrant et irrégulier) qui marquent la spécificité de son statut.19 Cet ensemble de sous-catégories participent à la tendance contemporaine, qui n?est pas nécessairement positive, de formation d?une catégorie propre, reconnue à la fois par le droit international des droits du travail et de l?homme.20 Si le travailleur migrant, à la fois travailleur et expatrié, intéresse les organisations internationales de plusieurs types, qu?elles soient universelles ou régionales, dotées d?une compétence générale ou spécialisée, on voit que ceux en situation irrégulière ont été tardivement pris en compte par lês instruments internationaux. On peut se poser la question de savoir si la régularité de leur situation juridique produit des incidences sur le niveau de protection octroyé par rapport à ceux considérés en situation régulière dans l?Etat où ils vivent. L?apparente égalité de traitement semble illusoire, plusieurs bénéfices n?étant accordés conventionnellement qu?aux travailleurs migrants en situation régulière. Cette réalité, fondée sur une lecture restrictive des droits ou a rights-based approach, a pour effet de circonscrire l?ampleur de la protection des travailleurs migrants en situation irrégulière. Elle tend toutefois à être remise en cause grâce à une lecture progressiste des droits, fondée plutôt sur les principes ? a principle-based approach ? et moins sur le volontarisme étatique. Cela confirme l?accent mis sur la justice objective au détriment de la loi formelle qui s?en écarte souvent. Une telle lecture favorise l?érosion des différences de traitement fondées sur la régularité ou la nationalité du travailleur.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (10) . Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Integrante / Philippe Weckel - Coordenador / Freya Baetens - Integrante / Guy Goodwin-Gill - Integrante / Efthymios Papastavridis - Integrante / Julinda BEQIRAJ - Integrante / Eva HOSTETTLER - Integrante / Sara IGLESIAS SÁNCHEZ - Integrante / Violeta MORENO LAX - Integrante / José Manuel PINA-DELGADO - Integrante / Maria Esther SALAMANCA AGUADO - Integrante / Silvia SCARPA - Integrante / Flavia ZORZI GIUSTINIANI - Integrante / Cathérine-Amélie CHASSIN - Integrante / Cristiano D?ORSI - Integrante / Victor Luis GUTIÉRREZ CASTILLO - Integrante / Francesca IPPOLITO - Integrante / Fiona Laure Ann LE DIRAISON - Integrante / Brusil Miranda Martine METOU - Integrante / Gabriele PORRETTO - Integrante / Jacobo RIOS RODRIGUEZ - Integrante / Janine Kisba SILGA - Integrante.
2007 - 2007
Casoteca de Direito e Política Pública
Descrição: O projeto da Casoteca tem três objetivos: (i) fornecer um acervo de casos didáticos sobre direito e política pública na América Latina; (ii) estimular a produção contínua de novos casos por meio do financiamento de pesquisa empírica; (iii) provocar o debate sobre a aplicação do ?método do caso? como uma proposta inovadora de ensino. Os casos consistem em relatos de situações-problema reais, produzidas a partir de investigação empírica e voltadas para o ensino. Evidentemente, não comportam uma única solução correta.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Integrantes: Paula Wojcikiewicz Almeida - Integrante / Mario Gomes Schapiro - Coordenador.