2023 - Atual
PROFISSA
Projeto certificado pelo(a) coordenador(a) Lisandro Zambenedetti Granville em 06/04/2023.
Descrição: O projeto PROFISSA é proposto para investigar, mapear e avançar a utilização de técnicas de engenharia de software quando aplicadas às redes programáveis no intuito de melhorar a qualidade estrutural, funcional e do processo de desenvolvimento de programas de rede.. Situação: Em andamento; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (3) . Integrantes: Muriel Figueredo Franco - Integrante / Eder John Scheid - Integrante / GRANVILLE, LISANDRO Z. - Coordenador.
2020 - 2022
Passive Wireless Intelligence Tracking System (PasWITS)
Descrição: Measuring the public interest in a particular product or service is highly important for the strategic planning of businesses. Livealytics provide an analytics solution for benchmarking the performance of sales and live marketing promotion activities, trade shows and retail spaces. Conducted use cases have demonstrated the technical feasibility of livealytics? approach to benchmark the attractiveness of events and exhibitions based on signals emitted by mobile devices using wireless protocols such as 802.11b or 802.11g (2.4 GHz) or 802.11a (5 GHz). Results obtained allowed these companies to identify particular audience characteristics of event that may benefit future exhibitions.
Hence, research and engineering challenges were identified in order to improve and extend livealytics? solution not only toward the passive capture of signals emitted by portable devices, but also for the analysis and prediction of exhibitions based on previous records of events and respective audiences. Engineering challenges include 1) broadening the scope of signal frame, based on Bluetooth protocols (when enabled) in their different versions, as well as 2) the unique identification of devices in the data link layer (MAC randomization). Research challenges include 3) the identification of attributes with discriminatory relevance for events, exhibitions, and audiences, as well as the definition a machine learning model for predicting how a particular event or exhibition would perform for a given audience.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (4)  / Doutorado: (7) . Integrantes: Muriel Figueredo Franco - Integrante / Eder John Scheid - Integrante / Burkhard Stiller - Coordenador / Bruno Rodrigues - Integrante / Christian Killer - Integrante / Thomas Bocek - Integrante / Simon Tuck - Integrante.Financiador(es): Inosuisse - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 5
2019 - 2023
CONCORDIA - Cyber security cOmpeteNce fOr Research anD Innovation
Descrição: The vision of CONCORDIA is to build strong community cooperation between all stakeholders, understanding that all stakeholders have their KPIs, bridging among them, and fostering the development of IT products and solutions along the whole supply chain. Technologically, it projects a broad and evolvable data-driven and cognitive E2E Security approach for the ever-complex ever-interconnected compositions of emergent data-driven cloud, IoT and edge-assisted ICT ecosystems.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (6) . Integrantes: Muriel Figueredo Franco - Integrante / Eder John Scheid - Integrante / Burkhard Stiller - Coordenador / Sina Rafati - Integrante / Bruno Rodrigues - Integrante / Eryk Schiller - Integrante / Chirstian Killer - Integrante / Geetha Parangi - Integrante.Financiador(es): European Horizon 2020 - Auxílio
										financeiro.Número de produções C, T & A: 44
2019 - 2022
SecGrid - Analysis and Visualization of Cyberattacks Traffic
Descrição: The project focuses on researching and developing an open-source platform for extracting, processing, and analyzing cyberattacks traffic and its impacts on companies and society. For that, SecGrid implements a set of extensible miners and visualizations that allows non-experts users to have insights about behaviors of cyberattacks. Also, the project supports a set of tools and features built on the top of the SecGrid architecture for machine learning analysis and classification of cyberattacks, information sharing, and cybersecurity planning.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (3)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (5)  / Doutorado: (6) . Integrantes: Muriel Figueredo Franco - Integrante / Eder John Scheid - Integrante / Burkhard Stiller - Coordenador / Bruno Rodrigues - Integrante / Christian Killer - Integrante / Jan von der Assen - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 11
2019 - 2021
E-Voting: Blockchain-based Remote Electronic Voting
Descrição: Electronic transformation of political systems has become a challenging task in recent years. Applying cryptography to voting and electoral processes is crucial for democracy. The lack of trust placed in Remote Electronic Voting (REV) systems poses the main obstacle to adoption. Transparency measures and additional public security tests (e.g., public intrusion tests), such as the publication of the source-code, actively contribute towards public verifiability, and hence, trust placed in REV systems. Serving as a transparent, immutable, and distributed ledger, Blockchains (BC) offer new benefits for REV. Instead of relying on a single, centralized authority, a system of distributed, equivalent authorities can be used. Further, BCs serve as a highly replicated, tamper-proof audit trail, which enables the verification of cryptographic proofs, crucial for REV.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Doutorado: (5) . Integrantes: Muriel Figueredo Franco - Integrante / Eder John Scheid - Integrante / Burkhard Stiller - Coordenador / Bruno Rodrigues - Integrante / Chirstian Killer - Integrante.Número de produções C, T & A: 7
2010 - 2014
Arquitetura Computacional para Controle Bioclimático
Descrição: Desenvolver um sistema computacional capaz de tomar decisões para gerenciar a eficiência energética da edificação, preservando as condições de conforto ambiental e as preferências particulares do usuário, tendo em vista o aproveitamento máximo dos meios passivos de condicionamento oferecidos pelo projeto arquitetônico.. Situação: Concluído; Natureza: Pesquisa. Alunos envolvidos: Graduação: (2)  / Mestrado acadêmico: (2) . Integrantes: Muriel Figueredo Franco - Integrante / Anderson Priebe Ferrugem - Integrante / Antonio Cesar Silveira Baptista da Silva - Coordenador.Número de produções C, T & A: 11